DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to
Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
Masahiro Tanaka
Microsoft
mtanaka@microsoft.comDu Li
Microsoft
duli.personal@gmail.comUmesh Chand∗
Microsoft
Umesh.Chand@amd.com
Ali Zafar
University of Virginia
mzw2cu@virginia.eduHaiying Shen
University of Virginia
hshen@virginia.eduOlatunji Ruwase
Microsoft
olruwase@microsoft.com
Abstract
The increasing scale of deep learning models has led to the de-
velopment of various parallelization strategies for distributed
training across accelerators. For example, fully sharded ap-
proaches like DeepSpeed ZeRO-3 and FSDP partition the
parameters of each layer across multiple GPUs and gather
them through communication when needed. These methods
rely on optimizations such as prefetching, which initiates
communication early to overlap it with computation and
reduce communication overhead, and unsharding, which re-
tains as many parameters in their unsharded form as possible
to reduce communication volume. Although the timing of
prefetching should be adjusted in response to dynamic mem-
ory usage during execution, these systems lack the flexibility
to control it, which limits the benefits of prefetching. More-
over, they cannot anticipate how memory usage will change
after prefetching is applied, making it difficult to combine it
effectively with other optimizations such as unsharding. We
present DeepCompile, which compiles user-defined models
into computation graphs and applies a sequence of profiling-
guided optimization passes for distributed training. Taking
dynamic memory usage into account, these passes flexibly
insert, reorder, or remove operations to improve communica-
tion–computation overlap, reduce memory pressure, and co-
ordinate multiple optimizations in a unified manner. To eval-
uate the effectiveness of this design, we implemented a fully
sharded approach like ZeRO-3 and FSDP on top of DeepCom-
pile, along with three optimizations: proactive prefetching,
selective unsharding, and adaptive offloading. We evaluate
DeepCompile on the training of Llama 3 70B and Mixtral
8×7B MoE models. DeepCompile achieves up to 1.28 ×and
1.54×performance improvements over ZeRO-3 and FSDP
baselines, respectively, and up to a 7.01 ×throughput increase
in settings with limited GPU resources, using offloading.
Keywords
deep learning, distributed training
∗Work done while at Microsoft. Now at AMD.1 Introduction
The rapid growth of deep learning has led to the emergence
of increasingly large models. Modern architectures often
contain billions of parameters, resulting in immense com-
putational demands. In this context, efficient parallelization
across multiple accelerator devices, such as GPUs, has be-
come essential for achieving feasible training times and man-
ageable costs.
There are several parallelization strategies for training
large models: In data parallelism, all model parameters are
replicated across multiple GPUs. This approach is natively
supported in many deep learning frameworks, including
PyTorch [ 21]. Pipeline parallelism [ 11] instead splits the
model by layers, assigning each block to a different GPU.
Tensor parallelism [ 25] divides parameter tensors within a
layer across GPUs, where each device computes a partial
result that is later aggregated. In addition to these, the fully
sharded approach , which is implemented in DeepSpeed ZeRO-
3 [22] (hereafter ZeRO-3) and Fully Sharded Data Parallel
(FSDP) [ 27], partitions the parameters of each layer across
multiple GPUs and gathers them through communication
before each layer’s computation begins.
While these strategies provide scalability, efficiently man-
aging memory and overlapping communication with com-
putation to reduce communication overhead [ 31,32] remain
open challenges. Existing systems rely on various optimiza-
tion techniques to address these issues. In the context of the
fully sharded approach, such as ZeRO-3 and FSDP, prefetch-
inginitiates communication early to gather partitioned pa-
rameters and overlap it with computation; unsharding keeps
parameters in their full form to reduce communication when
memory permits; and offloading , which moves data from
GPU memory to host memory, is often used in combination
when GPU memory is insufficient.
Although these optimizations are effective in principle,
applying them efficiently in practice is not straightforward.
Take prefetching as an example. In the fully sharded ap-
proach, parameters partitioned across multiple GPUs must
1arXiv:2504.09983v1  [cs.DC]  14 Apr 2025Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
be gathered via all-gather communication, which requires
a large buffer to hold the gathered parameters. Initiating
the all-gather earlier increases opportunities to overlap com-
munication with computation. However, it also extends the
buffer’s lifetime and increases memory pressure, since the
buffer cannot be released until all computations that use
the parameters have completed. Similarly, the overhead of
offloading can be mitigated by minimizing data transfers
between host and GPU memory and overlapping them with
computation. To make these optimizations effective, it is es-
sential to flexibly adjust the timing of all-gather and offload-
ing operations, monitor memory usage trends, and analyze
data dependencies across broad scopes such as the forward
and backward passes.
Moreover, when multiple optimizations are applied to-
gether, their interactions must be carefully coordinated. For
instance, unsharding can improve performance when com-
munication is on the critical path, but when combined with
prefetching, it must also account for the additional memory
pressure introduced by early optimization.
In fully sharded approaches like ZeRO-3 and FSDP, all-
gather operations are implemented via runtime hooks in-
serted into the user-level code (typically in Python). Opti-
mizations such as prefetching and unsharding are supported,
but this design lacks the flexibility to adjust the timing of
all-gather or offloading operations based on runtime mem-
ory usage over broader scopes, such as an entire forward or
backward pass. Moreover, there is no clear mechanism to
coordinate multiple optimizations in a unified manner.
Other systems have been proposed to automatically com-
bine multiple optimizations for distributed training based
on profiling. Examples include Alpa [ 19], FlexFlow [ 12], and
Unity [ 29], which aim to determine effective combinations
of parallelization strategies such as data, tensor, and pipeline
parallelism, as well as to apply kernel-level optimizations like
kernel fusion. However, these systems primarily focus on
static planning of parallelization strategies and kernel-level
optimizations. They do not take into account runtime dy-
namics such as changes in memory usage during execution.
As a result, they lack mechanisms to adjust communication
schedules, adapt to memory availability at runtime, or coor-
dinate optimizations such as prefetching, unsharding, and
offloading.
To address these limitations, we introduce DeepCompile, a
compiler-based system that uses an existing compiler to con-
vert the model into a computation graph and then transforms
it for optimization. DeepCompile applies a series of optimiza-
tion passes , where each pass targets a specific goal—such as
improving communication overlap—by inserting, removing,
or reordering operations in the graph. These passes make
decisions based on profiling such as operator execution timeand memory usage trends over broader scopes, including en-
tire forward and backward passes. Since each pass produces
a modified graph, subsequent passes can analyze the result
and flexibly adapt to the effects of earlier transformations.
To evaluate the effectiveness of this design, we imple-
mented the fully sharded approach, which is similar to ZeRO-
3 and FSDP, as a series of optimization passes within Deep-
Compile. In addition, we implemented the following key
optimizations as separate passes.
Proactive prefetching. To maximize overlap between
communication and computation, this optimization
pass initiates all-gather as early as possible, consider-
ing how available memory changes as the forward and
backward passes progresses.
Selective unsharding. This pass keeps as many param-
eters unsharded as possible to reduce communication
overhead caused by all-gather communication, and de-
cides which parameters to unshard based on operator-
level memory profiling.
Adaptive offloading. DeepCompile offloads optimizer
states such as momentum and variance used by Adam [ 14]
to CPU memory when GPU memory is insufficient.
To reduce data transfer overhead, it offloads only the
amount of data that exceeds the memory limit and
schedules transfers to overlap with computation.
SimpleFSDP [ 33] takes a similar approach to DeepCompile
by using compilation to optimize the placement of all-gather
operations in the fully sharded approach. However, it focuses
specifically on prefetching and does not address other opti-
mizations such as unsharding or offloading, which leads to
notable differences in design. In SimpleFSDP, communica-
tion operations are inserted into the user-level code (Python)
before compilation, whereas DeepCompile first compiles the
model into a computation graph and then applies transforma-
tions. In SimpleFSDP’s design, the compiler must correctly
lower these manually inserted communication operations
into graph-level operators. While the PyTorch compiler cur-
rently supports lowering all-gather operations used by Sim-
pleFSDP, it may fail to handle other optimizations, such as
offloading, if they are implemented at the user level. This
design limits the extensibility of SimpleFSDP in supporting
and combining a broader range of optimizations.
We evaluated DeepCompile on large-scale distributed train-
ing tasks using Llama 3 70B and Mixtral 8x7B MoE mod-
els. Across all configurations, DeepCompile consistently im-
proved training efficiency compared to baselines, including
ZeRO-3, FSDP, and setups using PyTorch compiler optimiza-
tions. It achieved up to 1.28 ×improvement on Llama 3 70B
and up to 1.54 ×on the Mixtral 8x7B MoE model. Addition-
ally, it demonstrated a 7.01 ×increase in throughput when
using fewer GPUs with offloading.
2DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
2 Background and Motivating Example
2.1 Distributed Training
The emergence of Transformer architectures [ 30], which
enabled breakthroughs like BERT [ 6], has significantly accel-
erated the growth of modern deep learning models, such as
GPT-3 [ 3], Llama-2 [ 28], Llama-3 [ 10], Phi-3 [ 1], PaLM [ 5],
and OPT [ 34]. This trend has led to a tremendous increase in
computational demands. While accelerator devices such as
GPUs have become the standard, cutting-edge models now
require distributed training across multiple GPUs to be feasi-
ble. For example, Llama-3 [ 10] was trained on 16,384 NVIDIA
H100 GPUs over 54 days. Even fine-tuning, which adapts pre-
trained models to specific downstream tasks, often involves
dozens of GPUs running for hours or days.
In distributed training, where multiple GPUs are used in
parallel, reducing overhead from both inter-device commu-
nication and memory management is critical for efficiently
training large-scale models.
2.2 Parallelization Strategies
Various parallelization strategies have been proposed to im-
prove the efficiency of distributed training.
Data parallelism replicates the entire model on each GPU,
and each GPU processes a different portion of the training
data. A key advantage is that it can be used with any model
architecture without requiring code changes, and the com-
munication overhead is relatively low. However, because
each GPU must store a full copy of the model, large models
may exceed the memory capacity.
Unlike data parallelism, pipeline parallelism partitions the
model to fit within GPU memory by grouping layers into
coarser-grained stages and placing each stage on a different
GPU. The training batch is split into smaller fragments and
processed in a pipelined fashion. To fully utilize all GPUs,
the compute time of each stage should be approximately
balanced. In addition, the choice of partition points affects
the communication volume between GPUs. These factors
often require manual tuning to achieve optimal performance.
Tensor parallelism is primarily applied to the multi-head
attention and MLP layers in Transformer models. It splits spe-
cific parameter tensors along designated dimensions across
GPUs, performs computations locally, and aggregates results
using all-reduce communication. For example, in an MLP
block, the first weight matrix is typically split horizontally,
and the second one vertically; each GPU computes partial
results, and an all-reduce is applied after the second linear
transformation to combine them. In addition, although well-
tested implementations exist for standard architectures such
as GPT [ 3], adapting tensor parallelism to model variants
such as multi-query attention (MQA) [ 23], grouped-query
attention (GQA) [ 20], or multi-head latent attention [ 16]requires additional engineering effort. In each case, develop-
ers must manually identify which parameters can be split,
choose appropriate dimensions for partitioning, and ensure
correct synchronization across devices.
An alternative to pipeline and tensor parallelism is the
fully sharded approach , which partitions the parameters of
each layer across multiple GPUs. Frameworks such as Fully
Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP) and ZeRO-3 adopt this strategy.
During training, each GPU gathers its required parameter
shards using all-gather communication before computing
each layer. To reduce peak memory usage, the gathered pa-
rameters are discarded immediately after the layer’s com-
putation finishes. This approach is widely adopted because
it can be applied to arbitrary model architectures without
requiring manual restructuring. In this work, we focus on
optimizing this fully sharded approach.
2.3 Deep Learning Compiler
Deep learning compilers have rapidly advanced in recent
years [ 2,4,9]. They translate high-level models into computa-
tion graphs, which enables graph-level analysis and flexible
optimizations such as operator reordering, fusion, and mem-
ory reuse.
Major frameworks have been integrating compiler capa-
bilities into their ecosystems. For example, PyTorch now in-
cludes its own compiler infrastructure to enable graph-based
optimizations [ 2]. Since these compilers can be applied to
the vast number of existing model implementations, they
are now widely used in practice.
2.4 Motivating Example
The fully sharded approach, as implemented in systems like
ZeRO-3 and FSDP, employs runtime optimizations such as
prefetching and unsharding. However, these optimizations
alone are not sufficient to fully improve training efficiency.
Let us take prefetching as an example. Prefetching aims to re-
duce communication overhead by initiating all-gather opera-
tions earlier than the layer where the parameters are actually
needed, thereby overlapping communication with compu-
tation. Because the fully sharded approach allocates a large
buffer to store the gathered parameters, initiating all-gather
earlier extends the buffer’s lifetime and increases memory
pressure. Therefore, prefetching needs to be scheduled based
on memory usage patterns throughout the forward and back-
ward passes.
Figure 1 illustrates a typical pattern of GPU memory us-
age during a forward and backward pass. Memory usage
gradually increases during the forward pass as activations
are stored, and decreases during the backward pass as acti-
vations are released. At the beginning of the forward pass,
3Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
Figure 1: Memory usage trends and scheduling opportu-
nities for prefetching and offloading. Profile of several
final layers with a sequence length of 4096 and a vocab-
ulary size of 128k. Significant memory spikes are ob-
served in the log-softmax and negative log-likelihood
loss layers.
a substantial amount of unused memory is available, pro-
viding an opportunity to prefetch aggressively and increase
computation-communication overlap. In contrast, near the
end of the forward pass and throughout the backward pass,
memory usage is high, limiting the opportunity for prefetch-
ing due to reduced memory availability. As the backward
pass progresses and memory is gradually freed, more aggres-
sive prefetching becomes possible again. Existing systems
such as ZeRO-3 and FSDP typically allow users to specify
a fixed buffer size for prefetching. However, this static con-
figuration cannot adapt to changes in available memory as
computation progresses, limiting the potential benefits of
prefetching.
The same issue arises with offloading, which transfers
data such as optimizer states (e.g., momentum and variance
in Adam optimizer [ 14]) to host memory to reduce GPU
memory usage. While offloading can significantly reduce
peak GPU memory, the associated data transfers introduce
overhead. A naive strategy is to offload states before starting
the forward pass, but this leads to significant overhead due to
idle GPU time. Instead, data transfers and computation can
be overlapped. By initiating transfers at the beginning of the
forward pass and synchronizing their completion just before
memory usage rises to its limit, it is possible to hide the
cost of data movement. In the backward pass, the opposite
strategy can be applied: as memory usage decreases, transfers
from host memory to GPU can be initiated.
Figure 2: Workflow of compilation and optimization
with DeepCompile
These observations highlight the limitations of existing
approaches. To address these limitations, we introduce Deep-
Compile, a compiler-based approach designed to systemati-
cally optimize fully sharded training.
3 System Design
We now describe the design of DeepCompile, a compiler-
based system that enables graph-level transformations to
support flexible and coordinated optimization of distributed
training.
Figure 2 shows the overall workflow. Starting from a user-
defined training script written in a framework such as Py-
Torch, a base compiler (e.g., the PyTorch compiler) lowers the
model into an intermediate representation (IR) as a compu-
tation graph. DeepCompile takes this graph as input, trans-
forms it by adding communication operations for distributed
training, and applies optimizations. The resulting graph is
then deployed to a runtime engine running on GPU servers.
Note that DeepCompile does not assume that distributed
training logic is manually written in the model code. Instead,
it targets standard, framework-native implementations, such
as those commonly found on the HuggingFace Model Hub1,
and programmatically adds necessary operators including
communication and synchronization operations to the graph.
1https://huggingface.co/models
4DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
Figure 3: Optimization and profiling loop in DeepCom-
pile
To support dynamic and memory-aware optimizations,
DeepCompile organizes its graph transformations as a se-
quence of optimization passes . Each pass rewrites the compu-
tation graph based on a specific strategy, such as inserting
communication operators or reordering memory-intensive
computations. After applying each pass, DeepCompile exe-
cutes the modified graph to collect runtime profiling data,
including operator execution times, communication over-
head, and memory usage trends. This information is then
used to guide the next optimization pass. By repeating this
process, DeepCompile incrementally refines the graph with
awareness of runtime behavior.
In addition, to account for memory usage changes that
arise during actual training, DeepCompile periodically runs
short training iterations between groups of optimization
passes. While DeepCompile focuses primarily on the forward
and backward passes, other parts of the training process,
such as parameter updates, can significantly affect memory
usage. For example, the Adam optimizer typically allocates
a large buffer after the first backward pass completes. To
capture such changes, DeepCompile runs several training
iterations to reflect the updated memory dynamics, then
applies another round of optimization passes adapted to the
new conditions.
Figure 3 illustrates this two-level loop: an inner loop of op-
timization and profiling, and an outer loop that periodically
runs training to reflect changes in the runtime environment.
By alternating between these loops, DeepCompile adapts
its transformations to the evolving memory and execution
characteristics of the model. This enables coordinated appli-
cation of optimizations such as prefetching, unsharding, and
offloading in a unified and data-driven manner.While DeepCompile is applicable to a wide range of op-
timization problems, this paper focuses on one representa-
tive use case: the fully sharded approach, as implemented
in ZeRO-3 and FSDP. We take advantage of DeepCompile’s
graph-level transformation and profiling infrastructure to im-
plement this use case. Specifically, we incorporate a series of
optimization passes that target key performance bottlenecks,
including proactive prefetching to overlap communication
with computation, selective unsharding to reduce redundant
data communication, and adaptive offloading to mitigate
GPU memory pressure.
In the following sections, we describe the implementation
of this fully sharded training strategy using DeepCompile
and detail the design and impact of each optimization pass.
4 Optimizations
DeepCompile enables a broad range of optimizations by
leveraging a computational graph extracted by the base com-
piler. In this paper, we first demonstrate how to implement
the fully-sharded approach. We then describe additional op-
timizations to reduce communication overhead and reduce
memory requirements.
4.1 Fully-sharded approach
In the fully sharded approach, each parameter tensor is
evenly partitioned across all GPUs. Before a layer is com-
puted, each GPU gathers the required parameter shards via
anall-gather communication, reconstructing the full param-
eters locally. Once the layer computation is complete, the
gathered parameters are discarded to free memory.
Existing systems such as ZeRO-3 and FSDP insert all-
gather and memory release operations around each layer
that uses a given parameter. When a model has many layers
with small parameter tensors, this results in frequent all-
gather operations on small fragments. Since all-gather com-
munication is inefficient for small data sizes (Fig. 5(c)), this
leads to significant communication overhead. To mitigate
this, both ZeRO-3 and FSDP allow users to manually group
multiple layers into a larger block, reducing the number of
all-gather operations. However, this increases the lifetime
of the buffers holding gathered parameters. Furthermore,
none of the layers in the block can begin computation until
all of their associated all-gather operations have completed,
often resulting in significant idle time. As a result, manually
tuning the block size for optimal performance is difficult.
DeepCompile operates by modifying the computation
graph to insert all-gather and release operations in a similar
manner to existing frameworks. However, unlike systems
that rely on layer boundaries or manually defined blocks,
DeepCompile uses operator-level dependency analysis to
determine the optimal placement of these operations.
5Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
Figure 4: Graph modification
As a first step toward enabling the fully sharded approach,
DeepCompile schedules all-gather operations just before
each parameter’s first use, and release operations immedi-
ately after its last use, minimizing the lifetime of each buffer.
Figure 4 shows an example of this process. If a parameter
is used by multiple operators, DeepCompile analyzes their
dependencies to ensure that the buffer is released only after
its final use.
Although this scheduling improves memory efficiency, it
does not necessarily improve execution speed. DeepCompile
addresses this by applying a series of optimization passes.
The initial pass focuses on ensuring the model fits within
available memory, and subsequent passes improve training
efficiency by adjusting the timing of communication, avoid-
ing unnecessary sharding, and overlapping data transfers
with computation.
4.2 Proactive prefetching
The initial graph transformation for the fully sharded ap-
proach in DeepCompile produces behavior similar to that of
ZeRO-3 or FSDP operating in their most fine-grained con-
figuration, where each layer triggers an all-gather before
its computation and a release immediately after. However,
because DeepCompile expresses this logic at the level of
the computation graph, it enables detailed analysis of opera-
tor dependencies and memory usage patterns. This graph-
based representation provides a foundation for more precise
and globally coordinated optimizations, such as prefetching,
which go beyond what is possible with heuristic or manually
configured approaches.
With the fully sharded approach implemented in the com-
putation graph, DeepCompile can build on top of it by in-
troducing prefetching. Prefetching is a commonly used tech-
nique in fully sharded training systems, and both ZeRO-
3 and FSDP include built-in support for it. The goal is to
improve training efficiency by overlapping communication
with computation, reducing the impact of all-gather latency.
Figure 5: Parameter sharding and prefetching
Figure 5(a) illustrates the timeline of a naive behavior of
fully sharded approach, where green boxes represent com-
putation and blue boxes indicate all-gather communication.
The number in each blue box corresponds to the respective
layer. Since all-gather communication is the primary source
of overhead, both ZeRO-3 and FSDP employ prefetching to
mitigate its impact. By launching all-gather earlier than the
parameters are used, these methods increase opportunities
to overlap communication and computation (Fig. 5(b)).
In existing frameworks, prefetching is implemented in a
static and coarse-grained manner. ZeRO-3 issues prefetches
based on a predefined buffer size, launching all-gather oper-
ations for as many upcoming parameters as can fit in that
buffer. Additionally, by grouping multiple layers into a larger
block, ZeRO-3 and FSDP can fuse several all-gather opera-
tions. This improves communication efficiency, particularly
for small data sizes. However, as discussed earlier, it can
also delay the computation of earlier layers because the sys-
tem must wait until all parameters involved in the fused
communication are gathered.
Furthermore, ZeRO-3 and FSDP are not designed to ac-
count for dynamic changes in memory availability. As shown
in Figure 1, memory usage fluctuates throughout the forward
and backward passes. More memory tends to be available in
the early stages of the forward pass and the later stages of the
backward pass. However, existing methods do not effectively
take advantage of these patterns. As a result, prefetching
opportunities are often underutilized, leading to suboptimal
efficiency.
To address this limitation, we propose an optimization
pass for proactive prefetching . Figure 6 illustrates the mem-
ory usage trend and scheduling behavior with and without
proactive prefetching. The goal of this optimization pass is
6DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
Figure 6: Memory usage and prefetch scheduling de-
cisions. Solid lines indicate memory usage without
prefetching; dotted lines show usage with proactive
prefetching. All-gather and release operations are la-
beled accordingly.
to move all-gather operations as early as possible while en-
suring that memory constraints are not violated. Since the
memory usage of each operator and the size of the all-gather
buffers are known from profiling, it is possible to estimate the
total memory footprint if an all-gather is scheduled earlier
than usual.
In Fig. 6, the dotted line shows the effect of proactive
prefetching. In this example, there are three all-gather opera-
tions. Based on profiling results, the system determines that
prefetching the first two can be safely done at the beginning
without exceeding the memory limit. The third all-gather,
however, would exceed the memory budget if issued immedi-
ately. Therefore, it is scheduled only after the buffer from the
first parameter has been released. This scheduling strategy
ensures efficient memory usage and allows prefetching to
be applied as aggressively as possible within the memory
budget.
Algorithm 1 formalizes this procedure. It examines each
all-gather operation and determines whether it can be moved
earlier in the schedule without exceeding the memory limit,
based on the profiled memory usage and buffer size. The
algorithm iterates over the operators in the initial schedule
𝑆0in reverse order. If the operator 𝑜𝑖is an all-gather, it checks
whether the operator can be moved earlier without violating
the memory constraint.
If the estimated memory usage remains below the limit,
the all-gather operator 𝑜𝑖is added to a group 𝑈of unsched-
uled all-gather operators that can be moved earlier. If the
memory usage exceeds the limit, the algorithm schedules the
all-gather operators in 𝑈at the current position, fusing them
where appropriate using the Fuse function. This strategy
ensures that memory usage stays within the limit 𝑀.Table 1: Notations
Symbol Description
𝑀 Total memory usage limit
𝑀prefetch Size limit for the buffer size of a prefetch group
𝑁 Number of operators
𝑆0 Initial schedule of operators [𝑜1,𝑜2,...,𝑜 𝑁]
𝑂𝑆 Fragments of optimizer states [𝑜𝑠1,𝑜𝑠2,...]
Pmem(𝑜)Profiled memory usage just before operator 𝑜
Bag(𝑜) Buffer size allocated by all-gather operator 𝑜
Bos(𝑜𝑠𝑖)Size of optimizer state fragment 𝑜𝑠𝑖
𝐹𝑢𝑠𝑒(𝑈)Produce operator fusing all-gathers in 𝑈
𝑇𝑐(𝑉) Communication time for 𝑉
𝛼 Fusion threshold parameter
Algorithm 1 Proactive prefetching
Require: Initial schedule 𝑆0, Memory limit 𝑀, Size limit for
prefetch group 𝑀prefetch .
1:𝑆←[] // Operators in new schedule
2:𝑈←[] // Unscheduled all-gathers
3:for𝑖=𝑁to2do
4: if𝑜𝑖isallgather then
5: ˜𝑚𝑈←Í
𝑜∈𝑈∪{𝑜𝑖}Bag(𝑜)
6: ˜𝑚𝑖−1←Pmem(𝑜𝑖−1)+˜𝑚𝑈
7: if˜𝑚𝑖−1<𝑀and ˜𝑚𝑈<𝑀prefetch then
8:𝑈←𝑈∪{𝑜𝑖} // Add𝑜𝑖to prefetch list
9: else
10:𝑆𝑓←Fuse(𝑈),𝑈←[]
11: Append𝑆𝑓to𝑆 // Schedule fused allgathers
12: end if
13: else
14: Append𝑜𝑖to𝑆
15: end if
16:end for
17:𝑆𝑓←Fuse(𝑈)
18:Append𝑆𝑓to𝑆 // Schedule all remaining allgathers
19:return𝑆
We also set the limit 𝑀prefetch on the prefetch group, as
moving too many allgather operations earlier does not pro-
vide any additional benefit. We can set this limit to a signifi-
cantly larger value than the predefined prefetch buffer size
used in existing implementations such as ZeRO-3 because
we also ensure the total memory usage is less than the limit
𝑀. By imposing this limit, we ensure that some memory re-
mains available for selective unsharding, which is discussed
in the next section.
When the data size is small, the communication time
remains nearly constant, even as the data size increases.
7Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
Therefore, fusing all-gather operators reduces communica-
tion overhead (Fig. 5(c)(d)), especially for small data sizes.
The criterion for fusing two all-gather operations is as fol-
lows: if𝑇𝑐(𝑉1)+𝑇𝑐(𝑉2)>𝛼·𝑇𝑐(𝑉1+𝑉2), where𝑉1and𝑉2
are the data sizes of two operations, fusion is beneficial and
the operations are merged. Otherwise, they are left sepa-
rate. Here,𝑇𝑐(𝑉)is profiled at runtime, and 𝛼is a tunable
parameter, set to 1.5 in our experiments.
SimpleFSDP [ 33] takes a similar approach to ours by opti-
mizing prefetching for the fully sharded approach using a
compiled computation graph. It performs memory-aware fu-
sion of all-gather operations to reduce communication over-
head. However, SimpleFSDP does not consider how memory
usage dynamically changes during the forward and back-
ward passes to determine how early each all-gather can be
issued. In contrast, our proactive prefetching algorithm uses
profiling data to make this decision, allowing communica-
tion to be overlapped with computation while staying within
memory constraints.
4.3 Selective unsharding
After applying the optimization pass for proactive prefetch-
ing, some free memory may remain, since the prefetching
size is deliberately limited. Selective unsharding leverages
this remaining memory by keeping some parameters un-
sharded after they are gathered. This approach can signifi-
cantly reduce communication overhead, although it requires
additional memory.
In the fully sharded approach, parameters are distributed
across all GPUs, and all-gather operations are required af-
ter each parameter update. Selective unsharding, however,
allows gathered parameters to remain unsharded after the
forward pass, eliminating the need for all-gather in the back-
ward pass.
This technique is especially beneficial when used with
gradient accumulation, a common method to increase the
effective batch size without increasing per-GPU memory
usage. Given a gradient accumulation step of 𝑁, the model
performs𝑁forward and backward passes while accumu-
lating gradients before applying a single parameter update.
Since parameters are not updated during this period, they
can remain unsharded across multiple forward and backward
passes.
We run profiling after applying proactive prefetching to
measure the peak memory usage. Then, we select as many
parameters to keep unsharded as possible, ensuring that the
total buffer size does not exceed the memory limit. The selec-
tion considers both the buffer size of each all-gather operator
𝑜, denoted as B(𝑜), and its communication time 𝑇𝑐(B(𝑜)). Pa-
rameters are prioritized based on the ratio𝑇𝑐(B(𝑜))
B(𝑜), where a
higher value indicates a greater reduction in communicationAlgorithm 2 Adaptive offloading (forward)
Require: Initial schedule 𝑆0, Memory limit 𝑀, optimizer
state fragments 𝑂𝑆
𝑆←[] // List of operators in output schedule
𝑀−←0 // Offloaded size
𝑀peak←𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑜𝑖∈𝑆0Pmem(𝑜𝑖)
𝑀𝑜𝑝𝑡←Í
𝑜𝑠𝑖∈𝑂𝑆Bos(𝑜𝑠𝑖)
𝑂𝑆offload←[]
for all𝑜𝑠𝑖∈𝑂𝑆do
if𝑀peak+𝑀opt−Í
𝑜𝑠𝑖∈𝑂𝑆offloadBos(𝑜𝑠𝑖)>𝑀then
𝑂𝑆offload←𝑂𝑆offload∪𝑜𝑠𝑖
Append offload operator for 𝑜𝑠𝑖to𝑆
end if
end for
for all𝑜𝑖∈𝑆0do
while Pmem(𝑜𝑖)+𝑀opt−𝑀−>𝑀do
Pop𝑜𝑠𝑖from𝑂𝑆offload
Append operator to synchronize the copy of 𝑜𝑠𝑖to𝑆
and free memory of 𝑜𝑠𝑖
𝑀−←𝑀−+Bos(𝑜𝑠𝑖)
end while
Append𝑜𝑖to𝑆
end for
return𝑆
time relative to memory cost. Following the trend shown in
Fig. 5(d), smaller parameters are generally selected first.
4.4 Adaptive offloading
Although optimizer states such as momentum and variance
used in Adam optimizer [ 14] are only needed for parameter
updates and are not required during the forward and back-
ward passes, they occupy a significant amount of memory
throughout training. Existing frameworks, such as Deep-
Speed, provide functionality to offload these states to CPU
memory. In fully sharded approaches like ZeRO-3, both
model parameters and optimizer states are partitioned across
GPUs. This design reduces the memory footprint on each
device and enables parallel data transfers between GPUs and
CPU memory. As a result, optimizer state offloading is often
used together with fully sharded training.
However, offloading and reloading optimizer states can
typically significant overhead. To address this challenge, we
propose an approach called adaptive offloading , which im-
proves upon existing offloading mechanisms in two ways.
First, by monitoring actual memory usage during training,
it minimizes the amount of data that needs to be offloaded.
Only the portion of optimizer states that would exceed the
memory limit is transferred to the host. Second, it takes
advantage of the characteristic memory usage patterns in
training. Since memory usage tends to increase during the
8DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
forward pass and decrease during the backward pass, adap-
tive offloading schedules data transfers to overlap with com-
putation. This overlap reduces the performance impact of
moving data between GPU and CPU memory.
Algorithm 2 presents the pseudo-code for the forward pass
with adaptive offloading of optimizer states. The optimizer
states are divided into a large enough number of fragments.
At the start of the forward pass, the algorithm schedules
operators to initiate asynchronous offloading of fragments
that exceed the memory limit. Since the copy operation is
asynchronous, computation can run in parallel. The mem-
ory must only be freed after the copy operation completes.
Therefore, the peak memory usage before each operator is
checked based on profiling when scheduling. If the mem-
ory usage exceeds the limit, the algorithm adds operators to
synchronize the copy and free memory for the fragments.
We also iterate over the operators in the backward pass
schedule, checking the available memory. If sufficient mem-
ory is available from that operator to the end, we schedule
a reload operation to transfer the optimizer states back to
the GPU. This approach enables overlapping the backward
computation with the data transfer from host memory to
GPU memory while adhering to memory constraints. Since
memory usage often increases during forward passes and
decreases during backward passes, this strategy allows for
efficient overlap of computation and offloading/reloading
operations.
5 Evaluation
We conducted experiments to evaluate the performance of
DeepCompile across multiple dimensions, including compu-
tational efficiency, memory utilization, and correctness.
5.1 Experimental settings
The experiments were performed on two or four servers,
each equipped with eight NVIDIA H100 GPUs (80GB mem-
ory per GPU) and 1TB of system memory. The GPUs within
each node were interconnected via NVLink, and each server
included eight network interfaces (HCAs) connected via In-
finiBand. The nodes were interconnected using InfiniBand
with an observed bandwidth of 340GB/s for both allgather
and reduce-scatter operations. Each server was equipped
with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8462Y+ processors.
In our experiments, we used the Llama-3 70B and Mix-
tral 8x7B models (47 billion parameters)[ 13] as our target
workloads. These models are representative examples of
dense and Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures[ 7,15,24],
respectively. Both were run using bfloat16 with mixed pre-
cision [ 18], while maintaining FP32 copies of parameters,
gradients, and Adam optimizer states. We also employedactivation checkpointing, integrated into the model imple-
mentation at the Transformer layer level, where each layer
is recomputed as a block.
We used PyTorch v2.6.0 and models from the HuggingFace
Model Hub without any built-in parallelization support. The
experiments were conducted with Python 3.10 and CUDA
12.4. DeepSpeed v1.6.4 and PyTorch FSDP were used as the
baseline frameworks, and DeepCompile was built on top of
DeepSpeed. The optimization passes and profilers in Deep-
Compile were implemented in Python (approximately 2.6K
lines), while the custom operators injected into the computa-
tional graph were implemented in C++ (approximately 900
lines).
While some distributed training strategies support partial
sharding—for example, sharding only optimizer states, or
both gradients and optimizer states while keeping parame-
ters unsharded—these configurations are not sufficient for
our target models. The total parameter sizes of Llama-3 70B
and Mixtral 8x7B exceed the memory capacity of a single
GPU (140 GB and 94 GB, respectively), requiring all parame-
ters, gradients, and optimizer states to be fully sharded across
devices. For this reason, we use the fully sharded configura-
tions of both DeepSpeed ZeRO-3 and PyTorch FSDP in our
evaluation.
Other large-scale training frameworks, such as Megatron-
LM, are not included in our comparison. Although Megatron-
LM has been widely adopted for large model training, it re-
quires a specialized implementation where parallelism strate-
gies are tightly coupled with model code. In contrast, we
focus on model-agnostic approaches that can be applied to
standard implementations. Similarly, frameworks that auto-
mate parallelization, such as Alpa [ 19], FlexFlow [ 12], and
Unity [ 29], are not included, as they remain experimental and
do not currently support the models used in this evaluation.
5.2 Efficiency
Figure 7 presents the throughputs observed in our experi-
ments. We used Llama-3-70B with 32 GPUs and Mixtral-8x7B
with 16 GPUs. We evaluated DeepSpeed ZeRO-3 both with-
out and with the PyTorch compiler enabled, labeled as ZeRO3
andZeRO3 (C) , respectively. Similarly, we include results
for PyTorch FSDP, labeled as FSDP andFSDP (C) depending
on whether the PyTorch compiler is enabled. For DeepCom-
pile, we tested three configurations: enabling only proac-
tive prefetching, enabling only selective unsharding, and
enabling both in that order. These configurations are labeled
asDeepCompile (P) ,DeepCompile (S) , and DeepCompile
(P+S) , respectively, in the charts. Since the models fit within
the available GPU memory at these scales, adaptive offload-
ing was not applied in these experiments.
9Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
We conducted this experiment using different batch sizes
and sequence lengths. In addition, we evaluated training
performance with gradient accumulation.
DeepCompile consistently outperformed all baseline meth-
ods, with the most significant gains observed when both
proactive prefetching and selective unsharding were enabled
(DeepCompile (P+S) ). Under the setting with a gradient ac-
cumulation step of 1, the smallest improvement over ZeRO-
3 was 1.11 ×, observed in the configuration with sequence
length 512 and batch size 1. In this setting, computation is
significantly faster relative to communication, leaving little
opportunity for our optimizations to hide communication
overhead through overlap. As a result, the benefit of prefetch-
ing and unsharding becomes limited. For all other condi-
tions, DeepCompile achieved approximately 1.14 ×to 1.18 ×
speedup over ZeRO-3, and 1.16 ×to 1.26 ×over FSDP in the
Llama-3-70B experiments. For Mixtral-8x7B, the speedups
over ZeRO-3 ranged from 1.07 ×to 1.35 ×, while those over
FSDP ranged from 1.06 ×to 1.14 ×. Mixtral-8x7B is an MoE
model, where only a subset of parameters is activated for
each input token. Due to its relatively small computation
load compared to total parameter size, it suffers more from
communication bottlenecks. As a result, similar to Llama-3-
70B, the improvements were slightly larger when the batch
size and sequence length were increased, enabling better
overlap between communication and computation.
Figure 7(a)(iii) and (b)(iii) show throughput results when
varying the gradient accumulation steps from 1 to 16. As
discussed in Section 4.3, this setting significantly benefits
from selective unsharding. In the Llama-3-70B experiment
(Fig. 7(a)(iii)), DeepCompile achieves increasingly higher
throughput as the accumulation step increases, with up to
1.28×improvement over ZeRO-3 at step 16. In Mixtral-8x7B
(Fig. 7(b)(iii)), the improvement is even more pronounced due
to the model’s heavier communication load. DeepCompile
achieves up to 1.54 ×higher throughput compared to ZeRO-3
at step 16.
In contrast, FSDP fails to run with accumulation steps
greater than 1, as it does not support accumulating gradi-
ents while keeping them partitioned. Instead, it gathers full
gradients after each backward pass, which causes the total
memory usage to exceed GPU capacity, leading to memory
allocation failures.
5.3 Memory Utilization
The optimization passes described above allow DeepCompile
to utilize GPU memory more effectively, contributing to
increased throughput. We compare the memory utilization
of DeepCompile against other baselines. Figure 8 presents
the peak GPU memory usage for different models across
various sequence lengths.The memory footprints of ZeRO-3 and FSDP are approx-
imately 40GB for Llama-3-70B and 30GB for Mixtral-8x7B.
When selective unsharding is enabled, DeepCompile actively
utilizes available memory to keep more parameters unsharded.
We configure a safety margin by first reserving approxi-
mately 7GB for the CUDA driver, NCCL buffers, and other
runtime components, and then applying an additional 10%
margin to the remaining memory. As a result, DeepCompile
(S)andDeepCompile (P+S) consistently use around 65GB
in all cases. This demonstrates that the selective unsharding
mechanism dynamically adapts the amount of unsharded
parameters based on the available memory at runtime.
5.4 Adaptive Offloading
The Llama-3-70B model requires 32 or more GPUs, each with
80GB of memory, to fit entirely into GPU memory under our
current settings. However, by offloading optimizer states,
we are able to fit the model onto just 16 GPUs. To evalu-
ate the benefits of adaptive offloading of optimizer states,
as described in Section 4.4, we compared the throughput
achieved using DeepSpeed’s offloading feature with that of
our adaptive offloading approach.
Figure 9 shows the iteration times for each method. ZeRO3
(Offload optimizer) andZeRO3 (Offload optimizer)
+ Compile represent the results of using DeepSpeed ZeRO-3
with and without the PyTorch compiler, respectively. Notably,
DeepSpeed not only offloads optimizer states to host memory
but also performs parameter updates on the CPU. While this
approach saves more memory than DeepCompile’s offload-
ing, it significantly slows down parameter updates. Since this
behavior makes it difficult to compare DeepSpeed’s offload-
ing directly with our method—which keeps parameter up-
dates on the GPU—we also included results for DeepCompile
(Offload optimizer all + sync) , which offloads all opti-
mizer states at the beginning of the forward pass and reloads
them synchronously at the end. Our adaptive offloading
method is shown as DeepCompile (Offload selective
+ async) , which minimizes the amount of data offloaded
and overlaps offloading and reloading asynchronously with
computation.
The experimental results in Figure 9 indicate that adaptive
offloading ( DeepCompile (Offload selective + async) )
achieves up to 7.0 ×and 6.9 ×higher throughput than ZeRO3
(Offload optimizer) andZeRO3 (Offload optimizer)
+ Compile , respectively, when the batch size is 1 and the
sequence length is 1024. It also demonstrates a 2.6 ×improve-
ment over DeepCompile (Sync) .
5.5 Compilation time
As shown in Fig.3, DeepCompile applies a sequence of opti-
mization passes. In our experiments, we first executed the
10DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
Figure 7: Throughputs resulting from Llama-3 70B and Mixtral 8x7B models
Figure 8: Memory utilization from Llama-3 70B and
Mixtral 8x7B models
pass that inserts allgather and release operations. After a
short warmup period (five training iterations), we applied ad-
ditional passes including proactive prefetching and selective
unsharding.
Figure 9: Throughput results for adaptive offloading
These passes involve graph analysis and profiling, result-
ing in several minutes of overhead for our target models.
Table 2 reports the time required for each configuration,
measured with batch size 1 and sequence length 512.
The variation in compile time across optimization con-
figurations for the same model is less than 10%, indicating
11Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
Table 2: Time for compilation
Proactive
prefetchingSelective
unshardingBoth
Llama-3 70B 254.8 s 248.6 s 266.9 s
Mixtral 8x7B 437.0 s 416.5 s 407.8 s
that the additional cost of enabling proactive prefetching or
selective unsharding is relatively minor compared to the base
analysis and scheduling pass. On the other hand, compile
times vary more significantly across models, as seen in the
longer durations for Mixtral-8x7B compared to Llama-3-70B.
This difference stems from model-specific factors such as
graph size and layer composition.
It is important to note that this compilation overhead oc-
curs only once before training begins. During actual training,
the compiled graph is reused without incurring any addi-
tional overhead. Given that model training typically consists
of hundreds to thousands of iterations, the one-time compi-
lation cost is negligible in practice.
Furthermore, the results of the optimization passes can
be cached and reused across training runs as long as key
settings such as batch size and sequence length remain un-
changed. This reuse is particularly valuable when sweeping
hyperparameters such as learning rates or dropout ratios,
enabling users to avoid repeating the initial compilation and
further reducing end-to-end overhead.
5.6 Correctness
To verify the correctness of the optimization passes in Deep-
Compile, we compared the resulting loss values with those of
DeepSpeed ZeRO-3. We initialized Llama-3 70B model with
random weights but the same random seed in both settings.
We used the AG News corpus [ 35] as training examples, with
the sequence length and micro batch size set to 512 and 1,
respectively. The learning rate was set to 1.5e-5. Figure 10
shows the training losses for both settings. Although some
operators are non-deterministic and introduce subtle differ-
ences, the loss curves were closely aligned.
6 Related Work
6.1 Distributed Training Framework
As discussed in Section 2, various distributed training strate-
gies have been proposed to scale deep learning models be-
yond the capacity of a single GPU. For instance, tensor par-
allelism, as introduced in Megatron-LM [ 25], splits large
matrix operations across devices, while pipeline parallelism,
as implemented in GPipe [ 11], assigns consecutive layers
to different GPUs. While effective, both approaches require
Figure 10: Verification of loss values
the user to manually modify the model to specify how ten-
sors or layers are partitioned. This makes it challenging to
adapt these strategies to diverse or rapidly evolving model
architectures.
In contrast, our work focuses on the fully sharded ap-
proach, as implemented in ZeRO [ 22] and FSDP [ 27], which
requires no model code changes and is applicable to a wide
range of architectures. DeepCompile builds on this fully
sharded approach and introduces compiler-level optimiza-
tions to improve its efficiency.
Note that DeepCompile is not inherently limited to the
fully sharded approach. Its design is compatible with other
parallelization strategies. For example, RaNNC [ 26] automat-
ically partitions the computation graph to enable pipeline
parallelism, and Alpa [ 19] selects distributed execution rules
based on the partitioned state of tensors. Similarly, DeepCom-
pile could support automated parallelization by replacing
computation operators in the graph and integrating this with
other optimization passes within a unified framework.
6.2 Optimizing Parallelization Strategies
To improve training efficiency for large-scale models, vari-
ous strategies such as data, tensor, and pipeline parallelism
have been studied. Recent work has focused on automatically
discovering optimal combinations of these strategies, includ-
ing Alpa [ 19], FlexFlow [ 12], Unity [ 29], and Galvatron [ 17].
Dynamic switching techniques have also been proposed,
such as HotSpa [ 8], which aims to adaptively reconfigure
parallelization strategies during training.
However, these approaches generally assume that the
model is already implemented in a way that supports the de-
sired forms of parallelism. In practice, tensor and pipeline par-
allelism often require model-specific partitioning logic and
integration with low-level APIs. Supporting multiple strate-
gies and enabling dynamic switching can involve consider-
able engineering effort, particularly for complex or evolving
model architectures. As a result, despite their promise, such
12DeepCompile: A Compiler-Driven Approach to Optimizing Distributed Deep Learning Training
automated parallelization systems have seen limited adop-
tion in current practice.
6.3 Computation-Communication
Overlapping
As discussed earlier, widely used frameworks such as ZeRO-
3 and FSDP incorporate prefetching techniques to overlap
communication with computation and reduce latency from
all-gather operations. Prefetching has become a standard op-
timization for improving efficiency in fully sharded training.
More recently, techniques for overlapping communica-
tion at a finer granularity, such as intra-layer parallelism,
have also been proposed [ 31,32]. These approaches aim
to eliminate or hide communication costs by restructuring
computation within layers. In contrast, our work focuses on
profiling-guided, graph-level optimization of communication
overlap.
Like DeepCompile, SimpleFSDP [ 33] targets compiler-
level optimization of the fully sharded approach. It performs
memory-aware fusion of all-gather operations to reduce
communication overhead, but does not take into account dy-
namic changes in memory usage when deciding how early
each all-gather can be issued without exceeding memory
constraints. Moreover, SimpleFSDP focuses solely on sched-
uling communication for FSDP. In contrast, DeepCompile is
designed to support a broader range of optimizations and en-
ables techniques such as selective unsharding and adaptive
offloading.
7 Conclusion
We introduced DeepCompile, a compiler-based framework
for optimizing distributed training of large-scale deep learn-
ing models. DeepCompile starts from a standard single-GPU
computation graph and incrementally inserts distributed op-
erators such as all-gather and release, enabling graph-level
analysis and holistic optimization of distributed training. Un-
like existing frameworks like ZeRO-3 and FSDP, which rely
on heuristics and fixed module boundaries, DeepCompile
leverages runtime profiling to flexibly reorder and coordi-
nate operations based on actual memory usage and data
dependencies.
Built on this foundation, DeepCompile implements a fully
sharded training approach along with three key optimiza-
tions: proactive prefetching to improve communication–computation
overlap, selective unsharding to reduce redundant commu-
nication, and adaptive offloading to dynamically manage
memory under tight resource constraints. These optimiza-
tion passes are applied in sequence, informed by profiling
feedback, allowing DeepCompile to coordinate them effec-
tively in a unified compilation framework.Our experiments demonstrate that DeepCompile consis-
tently outperforms ZeRO-3 and FSDP baselines across a
range of configurations. It achieves up to 1.28 ×and 1.54 ×
higher throughput for Llama-3 70B and Mixtral 8 ×7B mod-
els, respectively. Moreover, in scenarios with limited GPU
memory, DeepCompile’s adaptive offloading achieves up to
a 7.01 ×throughput improvement by automatically overlap-
ping communication and reducing memory pressure.
DeepCompile represents a step forward in compiler-driven
distributed training. Its graph transformation capabilities and
runtime-aware optimization passes offer a scalable and auto-
mated path toward efficient parallelization. In future work,
we aim to extend DeepCompile to support broader classes of
optimizations, such as fully automated parallelization plan-
ning and enhanced memory scheduling.
References
[1]Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, et al .2024. Phi-3 Technical
Report: A Highly Capable Language Model Locally on Your Phone.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219 (2024).
[2]Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, et al .2024. PyTorch 2: Faster Ma-
chine Learning Through Dynamic Python Bytecode Transformation
and Graph Compilation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’24) . 929–947.
[3]Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, et al .2020. Language models
are few-shot learners. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS ’20) 33, Article 159
(2020), 1877–1901 pages.
[4]Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, et al .2018. TVM: An
automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 13th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI ’18) . 579–594.
[5]Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, et al .2022.
PaLM: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311 (2022).
[6]Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) . 4171–
4186.
[7]William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. 2022. Switch trans-
formers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient
sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) 23, 120 (2022),
1–39.
[8]Hao Ge, Fangcheng Fu, Haoyang Li, Xuanyu Wang, Sheng Lin, Yujie
Wang, Xiaonan Nie, Hailin Zhang, Xupeng Miao, and Bin Cui. 2024.
Enabling Parallelism Hot Switching for Efficient Training of Large
Language Models. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’24) . 178–194.
[9]Google. 2023. XLA: Optimizing Compiler for Machine Learning. https:
//www.tensorflow.org/xla.
[10] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, et al .2024. The
Llama 3 Herd of Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024).
[11] Yanping Huang, Yanan Cheng, Ankur Bapna, et al .2019. GPipe: Effi-
cient Training of Giant Neural Networks using Pipeline Parallelism. In
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information
13Masahiro Tanaka, Du Li, Umesh Chand, Ali Zafar, Haiying Shen, and Olatunji Ruwase
Processing Systems , Vol. 32. 103–112.
[12] Zhihao Jia, Matei Zaharia Lin, and Alex Aiken. 2018. Beyond data
and model parallelism for deep neural networks. In 13th USENIX Sym-
posium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) .
485–500.
[13] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, et al .2024.
Mixtral of Experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088 (2024).
[14] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A Method for Stochastic
Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[15] Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, et al .2021. GShard:
Scaling giant models with conditional computation and automatic
sharding. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) .
[16] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, et al .2024. DeepSeek-V2: A Strong, Economical,
and Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Language Model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.04434 (2024).
[17] Xupeng Miao, Yujie Wang, Youhe Jiang, Chunan Shi, Xiaonan Nie,
Hailin Zhang, and Bin Cui. 2022. Galvatron: Efficient Transformer
Training over Multiple GPUs Using Automatic Parallelism. 16, 3 (2022),
470–479.
[18] Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, et al .2017. Mixed
Precision Training. http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.03740
[19] Zhihao Mo, Zhuang Zhao, Yuze Zhu, Ajay Jain, Tushar Yu, Shaoduo
Shi, Yida Yang, Hang Zhang, Qimin Ho, Tianqi Chen, et al .2022. Alpa:
Automating inter-and intra-operator parallelism for distributed deep
learning. In Proceedings of 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) . 559–578.
[20] Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Jacob Devlin, Gaurav Mishra,
and Adam Roberts. 2021. Do Transformer Modifications Transfer
Across Implementations and Applications?. In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-IJCNLP 2021) . 2051–2061.
[21] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, et al .2019. PyTorch: An Im-
perative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 . 8024–8035.
[22] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He.
2020. ZeRO: memory optimizations toward training trillion param-
eter models. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC ’20) .
1–16.
[23] Noam Shazeer. 2019. Fast Transformer Decoding: One Write-Head
is All You Need. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS Workshop on Machine
Learning and the Physical Sciences .
[24] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Piotr Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc
Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously large neural
networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
[25] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGres-
ley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2019. Megatron-LM: Train-
ing multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 (2019).
[26] Masahiro Tanaka, Kenjiro Taura, Toshihiro Hanawa, and Kentaro
Torisawa. 2021. Automatic Graph Partitioning for Very Large-scale
Deep Learning. In 2021 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium (IPDPS) . 1004–1013.
[27] PyTorch Team. 2023. Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP). https://
pytorch.org/docs/stable/fsdp.html.
[28] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-
Anne Lachaux, Naman Goyal, Siddhartha Batra, Piotr Bojanowski,
Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, et al .2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation
and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 (2023).
[29] Tobias Unger, Hang Zhang, Tushar Yu, Zhuang Zhao, Zhihao Mo, Yu-
jing He, Chengcheng Peng, Alex Aiken, Matei Zaharia, and ZhihaoJia. 2022. Unity: Accelerating DNN Training Through Joint Optimiza-
tion of Algebraic Transformations and Parallelization. In 16th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
22). 579–596.
[30] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. At-
tention is All You Need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30 (2017), 5998–6008.
[31] Guanhua Wang, Chengming Zhang, Zheyu Shen, Ang Li, and Olatunji
Ruwase. 2024. Domino: Eliminating Communication in LLM Training
via Generic Tensor Slicing and Overlapping. arXiv:2409.15241
[32] Shibo Wang, Jinliang Wei, Amit Sabne, Andy Davis, et al .2022. Overlap
Communication with Dependent Computation via Decomposition in
Large Deep Learning Models. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems (ASPLOS 2023) . 93–106.
[33] Ruisi Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Will Feng, Andrew Gu, Sanket Purandare,
Wanchao Liang, and Francisco Massa. 2024. SimpleFSDP: Simpler Fully
Sharded Data Parallel with torch.compile. arXiv:2411.00284 [cs.DC]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00284
[34] Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen,
Seung Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin,
et al.2022. OPT: Open pre-trained transformer language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.01068 (2022).
[35] Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2016. Character-level
Convolutional Networks for Text Classification. arXiv:1509.01626
14