torch.func
Created On: Jun 11, 2025 | Last Updated On: Jun 11, 2025
torch.func, previously known as “functorch”, is JAX-like composable function transforms for
PyTorch.
This library is currently in beta. What this means is that the features generally work (unless
otherwise documented) and we (the PyTorch team) are committed to bringing this library
forward. However, the APIs may change under user feedback and we donʼt have full
coverage over PyTorch operations.
If you have suggestions on the API or use-cases youʼd like to be covered, please open a
GitHub issue or reach out. Weʼd love to hear about how youʼre using the library.
What are composable function transforms?
A “function transform” is a higher-order function that accepts a numerical function and returns
a new function that computes a different quantity.
torch.func  has auto-differentiation transforms (grad(f) returns a function that computes
the gradient of f), a vectorization/batching transform (vmap(f) returns a function that
computes f over batches of inputs), and others.
These function transforms can compose with each other arbitrarily. For example, composing
vmap(grad(f))  computes a quantity called per-sample-gradients that stock PyTorch cannot
efficiently compute today.
Why composable function transforms?
There are a number of use cases that are tricky to do in PyTorch today:Note 
To analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or
navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site,
Facebookʼs Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies
Policy.10/10/25, 3:03 PM torch.func — PyTorch 2.8 documentation
https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/func.html 1/4computing per-sample-gradients (or other per-sample quantities)
running ensembles of models on a single machine
efficiently batching together tasks in the inner-loop of MAML
efficiently computing Jacobians and Hessians
efficiently computing batched Jacobians and Hessians
Composing vmap() , grad() , and vjp() transforms allows us to express the above without
designing a separate subsystem for each. This idea of composable function transforms comes from
the JAX framework.
Read More
torch.func Whirlwind Tour
What is torch.func?
Why composable function transforms?
What are the transforms?
torch.func API Reference
Function Transforms
Utilities for working with torch.nn.Modules
Debug utilities
UX Limitations
General limitations
torch.autograd APIs
vmap limitations
Randomness
Migrating from functorch to torch.func
function transforms
NN module utilities
functorch.compile
Rate this Page★★★★★
Send FeedbackTo analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or
navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site,
Facebookʼs Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies
Policy.10/10/25, 3:03 PM torch.func — PyTorch 2.8 documentation
https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/func.html 2/4Previous
torch.fft.ifftshiftNext
torch.func Whirlwind Tour
© Copyright PyTorch Contributors.
Built with the PyData Sphinx Theme 0.15.4.
Docs
Access comprehensive
developer documentation
for PyTorchTutorials
Get in-depth tutorials for
beginners and advanced
developersResources
Find development
resources and get your
questions answered
View Docs View Tutorials View Resources
Stay in touch for updates, event info, and the latest news
By submitting this form, I consent to receive marketing emails from the LF and its projects
regarding their events, training, research, developments, and related announcements. I understand
that I can unsubscribe at any time using the links in the footers of the emails I receive. Privacy
Policy.
To analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or
navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site,
Facebookʼs Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies
Policy.10/10/25, 3:03 PM torch.func — PyTorch 2.8 documentation
https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/func.html 3/4© PyTorch. Copyright © The Linux Foundation®. All rights reserved. The Linux Foundation has
registered trademarks and uses trademarks. For more information, including terms of use, privacy
policy, and trademark usage, please see our Policies page. Trademark Usage. Privacy Policy.
To analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or
navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site,
Facebookʼs Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies
Policy.10/10/25, 3:03 PM torch.func — PyTorch 2.8 documentation
https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/func.html 4/4