torch.mtia.memory
Created On: Dec 09, 2024 | Last Updated On: Jun 08, 2025
The MTIA backend is implemented out of the tree, only interfaces are be defined here.
This package adds support for device memory management implemented in MTIA.
memory_statsReturn a dictionary of MTIA memory allocator statistics for a given device.
Previous
StreamNext
torch.mtia.memory.memory_sta
tsRate this Page★★★★★
© Copyright PyTorch Contributors.
Built with the PyData Sphinx Theme 0.15.4.Send Feedback
Docs
Access comprehensive
developer documentation
for PyTorchTutorials
Get in-depth tutorials for
beginners and advanced
developersResources
Find development
resources and get your
questions answered
View Docs View Tutorials View Resources
Stay in touch for updates, event info, and the latest newsTo analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or
navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site,
Facebookʼs Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies
Policy.10/10/25, 3:03 PM torch.mtia.memory — PyTorch 2.8 documentation
https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/mtia.memory.html 1/2First Name* Last Name* Email*
Select Country* SUBMIT
By submitting this form, I consent to receive marketing emails from the LF and its projects
regarding their events, training, research, developments, and related announcements. I understand
that I can unsubscribe at any time using the links in the footers of the emails I receive. Privacy
Policy.
© PyTorch. Copyright © The Linux Foundation®. All rights reserved. The Linux Foundation has
registered trademarks and uses trademarks. For more information, including terms of use, privacy
policy, and trademark usage, please see our Policies page. Trademark Usage. Privacy Policy.
To analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or
navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site,
Facebookʼs Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies
Policy.10/10/25, 3:03 PM torch.mtia.memory — PyTorch 2.8 documentation
https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/mtia.memory.html 2/2