Technical Report
PIPELINE MOE: A F LEXIBLE MOE IMPLEMENTATION
WITH PIPELINE PARALLELISM
Xin Chen, Hengheng Zhang, Xiaotao Gu, Kaifeng Bi, Lingxi Xie, Qi Tian
Huawei Cloud
fchenxin061, imhmhm, guxt1994, 198808xc g@gmail.com
fbikaifeng1, tian.qi1 g@huawei.com
ABSTRACT
The Mixture of Experts (MoE) model becomes an important choice of large lan-
guage models nowadays because of its scalability with sublinear computational
complexity for training and inference. However, existing MoE models suffer
from two critical drawbacks, 1) tremendous inner-node and inter-node communi-
cation overhead introduced by all-to-all dispatching and gathering, and 2) limited
scalability for the backbone because of the bound data parallel and expert par-
allel to scale in the expert dimension. In this paper, we systematically analyze
these drawbacks in terms of training efﬁciency in the parallel framework view
and propose a novel MoE architecture called Pipeline MoE (PPMoE) to tackle
them. PPMoE builds expert parallel incorporating with tensor parallel and re-
places communication-intensive all-to-all dispatching and gathering with a simple
tensor index slicing and inner-node all-reduce. Besides, it is convenient for PP-
MoE to integrate pipeline parallel to further scale the backbone due to its ﬂexible
parallel architecture. Extensive experiments show that PPMoE not only achieves
a more than 1:75speed up compared to existing MoE architectures but also
reaches 90% throughput of its corresponding backbone model that is 20smaller.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLM) have shown their dominance in various natural language processing
(NLP) tasks by largely pushing the limit of few-shot learning and zero-shot inference (Brown et al.,
2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Scao et al., 2022). Currently, it obeys a scaling law that a larger model
brings better performance. While being powerful and promising, scaling up to models like GPT-3
from small models and training them are expensive and non-trivial work.
Multiple techniques emerge to tackle the scaling problem. Tensor parallel is currently a widely
applied technique that scales models up on the width dimension with a split-compute-gather man-
ner (Shoeybi et al., 2019). However, tensor parallel produces massive and intensive communication
operations between devices, limiting its application to inner-node scenarios. Pipeline parallel, a
scheme that scales models from the depth dimension, is complementary to tensor parallel and able
to reach a limit of more than 500 billion parameters when incorporated with tensor parallel (Smith
et al., 2022).
However, training a model of more than 100 billion parameters is time- and resource-consuming.
Further scaling up is unacceptable both technically and ﬁnancially. Fortunately, MoE model is an
appropriate choice because it maintains scalability on the width dimension with sparsely activated
experts while keeping computational complexity nearly unchanged. The MoE architecture usually
cooperates with data parallel where on the device that holds one data parallel replica or rank (Lep-
ikhin et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2021; Rajbhandari et al., 2022), there is one or a speciﬁc number of
experts on it. Thus, it is very natural and easy to scale models up by scaling the number of experts, i.
e., number of data parallel replicas. That is to say, we can scale up MoE models almost limitlessly as
long as new devices are engaged. One critical drawback of this architecture is that the computation
of MoE layers follows a dispatch-compute-gather ﬂow, which introduces two all-to-all operators on
hidden embeddings, leading to a huge communication overhead that largely decreases the training
efﬁciency.
1arXiv:2304.11414v1  [cs.DC]  22 Apr 2023Technical Report
Recent work reveals that a moderate number of experts with a thick backbone which is wider on the
hidden dimension obtains better performance than a thin backbone with massive experts (Zoph et al.,
2022; Du et al., 2022), which also strongly coincides with our experimental results. This indicates
that the previous parallel architecture is not suitable for the new request and we need a uniﬁed
scheme of scaling both expert and backbone to efﬁciently enlarge model capacity and capability.
As depicted previously, there are existing techniques for scaling up backbones (tensor parallel and
pipeline parallel) and experts (MoE). However, Adopting them together within a uniﬁed framework
is non-trivial.
In this work, we systematically analyze the drawbacks of existing MoE architecture and propose a
uniﬁed framework called Pipeline MoE to efﬁciently and effectively scale model capacity and capa-
bility. To tackle the communication overhead of all-to-all on MoE layers, we propose a new expert
parallel scheme that all experts in an MoE layer are integrated inside a node so that it can be well
aligned with tensor parallel and no inter-node communication happens inside the MoE layer. Addi-
tionally, we replace the resource-consuming all-to-all communication with easy-implement tensor
slicing to largely diminish the communication overhead. To better scale model capacity, we incor-
porate pipeline parallel with expert parallel and tensor parallel in our Pipeline MoE, which makes
our system able to scale up to a trillion-level without duplicating backbone parameters.
Extensive experiments show that the Pipeline MoE can easily scale models to hundreds of billions
of and trillions of parameters and train it 1:75faster than existing ones. Moreover, the Pipeline
MoE achieves a throughput of 90% its corresponding backbone model which is 20smaller.
2 R ELATED WORK
Scaling Up Large Language Model. Large language models (LLMs) have reported dominating
performance of zero-shot and few-shot learning in various NLP tasks. After the introduction of trans-
former Vaswani et al. (2017), transformer language models rapidly go across the small and medium
scale Devlin et al. (2018); Radford et al. (2018; 2019); Raffel et al. (2020) and step into the era of
large language models with over 100 billion parameters Brown et al. (2020); Lieber et al. (2021);
Scao et al. (2022); Smith et al. (2022); Chowdhery et al. (2022). GPT-3 Brown et al. (2020), with
175 billion parameters, is the ﬁrst dense LLM that pushed the limit of 100 billion parameters and
achieved dramatic improvements in zero-shot and few-shot learning. Two open-source projects Scao
et al. (2022); Zhang et al. (2022) also published LLMs with similar sizes. Recently, the model sizes
(parameter count) are further increased to an incredible 530 billion (Megatron-Turing-NLG Smith
et al. (2022)) and 540 billion (PaLM Chowdhery et al. (2022)), because the scaling law Henighan
et al. (2020) is still working.
Efﬁcient Distributed Model Training. Scaling model training to tens of or hundreds of billion
parameters is a complicated task, which requires a lot of algorithmic innovations and engineer-
ing optimization. One of the most critical challenges is that the model cannot ﬁt into one single
device or even one single node due to limited onboard memory. Fortunately, researchers and en-
gineers proposed various techniques to jointly tackle this challenge including tensor model paral-
lel Shoeybi et al. (2019); Karakus et al. (2021), pipeline model parallel Narayanan et al. (2021);
Harlap et al. (2018); Narayanan et al. (2019), sequence parallel Korthikanti et al. (2022), checkpoint
activation Chen et al. (2016), etc.Such techniques have largely mitigated memory burden in train-
ing large language models. Our work is built upon some of these existing approaches and further
increases the efﬁciency of MoE model training with a novel parallel architecture.
Mixture of Experts. Mixture of Experts or MoE is early introduced for machine learning ap-
plications Jacobs et al. (1991); Masoudnia & Ebrahimpour (2014). Recently, MoE is leveraged to
enhance model capability because it is able to enlarge parameter count while keeping computational
complexity nearly unchanged for both training and inference Shazeer et al. (2017) due to its sparse
activating nature. Thanks to this fascinating property, the community achieve a huge leap in model
size from a billion to a trillion parameters Lepikhin et al. (2020); Fedus et al. (2021); Artetxe et al.
(2021).
Early MoE models usually applied an aggressive scaling scheme of a thin backbone with massive
experts to well ﬁt the demand of enlarging model sizes and the architecture of bound expert parallel
and data parallel Lepikhin et al. (2020); Kim et al. (2021); Artetxe et al. (2021), which, however,
2Technical Report
showed limited enhancement for model capability Rajbhandari et al. (2022). This scheme and par-
allel strategy bring huge communication overhead due to two all-to-all operations introduced by
expert parallel for each MoE layer. Recent works Zoph et al. (2022); Du et al. (2022) have shown
that a contradictory scheme with a thick backbone and a mild expert scaling schedule results in more
powerful MoE models. However, the existing parallel architecture designed for scaling experts is no
longer well suited for this new strategy. On the contrary, our scheme is designed to scale both the
backbone and experts, which is more ﬂexible and conﬁgurable.
3 M ODEL ARCHITECTURE
3.1 P RELIMINARY : PARALLEL AND MOE
3.1.1 B ASICS OF TRANSFORMER
In this paper, we take the decoder-only transformer architecture as an example to instantiate the
proposed architecture. In a densely connected transformer, a batch of sequences with stokens is
ﬁrst mapped to a tensor with a shape of bshthrough an embedding layer (word and positional),
wherebis the batch size, sis the sequence length, and his the hidden dimension. Then intermediate
states are fed through transformer blocks that are mainly composed of a self-attention module and
a feed-forward network (FFN) module. Finally, the processed intermediate states are sent to the
ﬁnal layers to calculate output information. Here, we dive into a transformer block and showcase
its detailed structure. The input is ﬁrst normalized with a LayerNorm layer, which keeps the tensor
shape unchanged. An attention module is applied to extract interaction between token embeddings.
After the attention module, another LayerNorm is placed. Then an FFN is used to further extract
information from input embeddings. With necessary skip connections, the processed embedding is
sent to a later block. For more details, we refer readers to Phuong & Hutter (2022) and Shoeybi et al.
(2019).
3.1.2 D ATA PARALLEL
Data parallel (DP) is the most broadly used technique to scale up deep neural network (DNN) train-
ing in recent years. As DNN models become larger, a single GPU or device may only provide a
relatively small throughput due to limited computing power and memory, while a larger batch size
may be needed to ensure training stability or faster training is required. Data parallel replicates
models between devices and split input data into micro-batches then feed to each replica. After all
replicas ﬁnish computing (both forward and backward), model replicas on each device are synchro-
nized by executing an all-reduce communication on gradients.
InputSelf AttentionLinear
LayerNormLinearGeLU
LayerNormLinearDropout
DropoutOutput
Dropout
Dropout
X𝒇𝒇X XXA1 XA2Y1 Y2
GeLU GeLUY1A1 Y2A2Z1 Z2𝒈𝒈DropoutZAttention MLPTransformer Layers  (N× )
Figure 1: Illustration of tensor parallel. A merged version of Figure 2 and Figure 3 from Megatron
paper Shoeybi et al. (2019).
3Technical Report
3.1.3 M ODEL PARALLEL
Model parallel can be applied when models get even larger and cannot be ﬁt into one GPU or even
one node. Commonly, model parallel is composed of tensor parallel and pipeline parallel Shoeybi
et al. (2019); Narayanan et al. (2021).
Tensor Parallel Tensor parallel (TP) partitions input matrices of general matrix multiply (GEMM)
into multiple sub-matrices along proper dimensions and executes smaller GEMMs inside each de-
vice. In a transformer layer, there are two groups of GEMMs that can be well-partitioned, i. e., the
self-attention module and the FFN module. With necessary communications, a transformer layer
can be well distributed into a set of devices and trained with tensor parallel.
Here, we take the FFN module as an example to brieﬂy introduce how tensor parallel works. An
FFN module is composed of a sequence of a GEMM, a GeLU, another GEMM, and a Dropout,
which can be presented as Z= Dropout(GeLU( XA)B). Considering that GeLU(a+b)6=
GeLU(a) + GeLU(b)andcat(Dropout( a);Dropout(b))6= Dropout(cat( a;b))where catrep-
resents concatenation along the proper axis, the weight matrix of the ﬁrst GEMM is partitioned
along its columns and the second is along its rows, as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, for each way, all
calculations are independent until Dropout, i.e.,Yi= GeLU(XAi)Bi, wherei= 1;2in this case.
In the forward pass, the Dropout operation needs to see the whole batch of input data so that the
goperation should be an all-reduce communication, while nothing for f. On the contrary, in the
backward pass, gradients should be all-reduced at f, while nothing at g. In this way, we distribute
parameters and calculations of GEMM equally into multiple devices with limited communication
overhead (only an all-reduce for forward and another for backward). For more details of tensor
parallel, we refer readers to the original paper of Megatron-LM Shoeybi et al. (2019).
1234 152637485 6 7 8
123 14253647586 7 8
12 1324354657687 8
1122334455667788Device 1
Device 2
Device 3
Device 4
Time
Forward Pass Backward Pass
Figure 2: Illustration of 1F1B Pipeline schedule. A re-built version of Figure 8 from PipeDream Har-
lap et al. (2018).
Pipeline Parallel While tensor parallel can handle models with over 10 billion parameters with a
single node of 8 Nvidia V100 GPUs, e.g., GPT-2, larger models like GPT-3 can barely ﬁt into a single
node. It is natural to split a model into multiple stages and ﬁt each stage into different nodes, which
formulate the core motivation of pipeline parallel (PP). When a former stage ﬁnishes computing,
intermediate hidden states are sent to the next stage via p2p communications and continue to process
in a forward pass. In backward, a latter stage ﬁnishes its backward computing, sends intermediate
gradient tensors into its pre-positioned stage, and continues to execute backward computing. Such
processes operate like a pipeline with a few micro-batches concurrently processed, as demonstrated
in Fig. 2 (here we take the mostly applied 1F1B pipeline as an example).
3.1.4 M IXTURE OF EXPERTS
Mixture of Experts (MoE) is ﬁrst introduced in machine learning to divide a problem space into ho-
mogeneous regions and conquer them with distinct experts. Recently, MoE is leveraged into sparse
model architectures to increase model capacity while keeping computational complexity unchanged.
As shown in Fig. 3, an MoE system is usually bound with data parallel, and an MoE layer is built
upon the FFN module and placed across multiple devices with expert parallel (EP). Inside an MoE
4Technical Report
InputMHA
LayerNormLayerNormTransformer Layers  (N/2)×FFNMHA
LayerNormLayerNormExpert 1Output
Gating
InputMHA
LayerNormLayerNormTransformer Layers  (N/2)×FFNMHA
LayerNormLayerNormExpert EOutput
Gatingall-to-allall-to-all
…
Devices EDevices 1
Figure 3: Illustration of an MoE model. A re-built version of Figure 3 from GShard paper Lepikhin
et al. (2020).
layer, token embeddings of each data-parallel rank are ﬁrstly fed into a gating module composed of
a linear layer and a softmax function, to generate scores for each token embedding that decide which
expert (FFN) this token should be processed in. Then token embeddings are dispatched to their desti-
nation experts via an all-to-all communication and processed by those experts. After that, processed
embeddings are combined with the pre-gating order with another all-to-all communication.
In this way, each token embedding is automatically sharded to the expert that is well-learned to pro-
cess such tokens, which implicitly strengthens the representative power of the model with negligible
computational overhead. However, the price is two additional all-to-all operations for each MoE
layer, which may largely slow down training and inference. Besides, a data parallel replica usually
holds all layers except for MoE layers on a single GPU or a node, largely limiting the backbone size
(nearly equal to the model with only one expert on each MoE layer). One way to scale up the model
may be partitioning along the layer axis, but distributing experts into all devices makes it much more
complicated to design the parallel scheme.
3.2 A S YSTEMATIC VIEW ON TRAINING EFFICIENCY OF MOE
The parallel architecture of MoE is a natural choice for scaling up model size and capacity. Most
existing parallel techniques including data parallel, tensor parallel, and expert parallel are adjusted
into its training framework. In this subsection, we showcase the parallel architecture of existing
MoE systems and analyze its advantages and drawbacks in terms of training efﬁciency in a system-
atic view. Two important conclusions can be drawn:
(1)The parallel architecture with bound DP and EP of existing MoE models is the key bottle-
neck of training efﬁciency .
(2)Current parallel architecture hinders the integration of TP and PP into existing MoE mod-
els, especially TP.
In the rest of this paper, we call the MoE with this typical architecture DPMoE (Data Parallel MoE)
since it is ﬁrmly bound with data parallel.
Expert Parallel and Data Parallel As we discussed previously, data parallel and expert parallel are
bound together to guarantee that experts are evenly distributed in the training cluster, which also
limits the ﬂexibility of model architecture and training conﬁguration. Assuming that there are D-
way data parallel and Eexperts, there are E=D experts on each data parallel rank1. As introduced
in subsection 3.1.4, token embeddings need to be dispatched to each expert and return to the original
data parallel rank after ﬁnishing processing on each expert, resulting in two inter-device all-to-all
1Eis always divisible by Din typical conﬁgurations.
5Technical Report
communication of bshdata size in the forward pass. Thus, the forward time of an MoE layer
is composed of gating, 1st all-to-all ( 1st a2a in the equation), FFN forward, and 2nd all-to-all ( 2nd
a2a), as shown in Eq. 12.
tforward =tgating +t1st a2a+tFFN +t2nd a 2a (1)
Here, we only consider the situation of DP + EP and leave TP for simplicity. Since the latency of
the gating module ( tforward ) is relatively small compared to the other three items, we simply omit
it here, and thus, tforwardt1st a2a+tFFN +t2nd a 2a. According to Narayanan et al. (2021), the
FFN module consumes 16bsh2=EFLOPs on each expert. Assume that each expert is able to process
F FLOPs per second, then the theoretical latency of the FFN module is t0
FFN = 16bsh2=(EF)3.
The latency of an all-to-all operation is rough (N 1)(ts+mN= (2B)), wheretsis an initial time
and we omit it for simplicity since it is small compared to the other item, Bis the communication
bandwidth,Nis the number of ranks involved in the all-to-all operation and is equal to Ein this
case, andmis the data count on each rank, which is equal to 2bsh=E , where 2indicates that
each element consumes 2bytes. Thus, the theoretical latency of an all-to-all operation is roughly
t0
a2a= (E 1)bsh=B . Combining these terms together, we have:
t0
a2a=t0
FFN = (E 1)EF=(16Bh): (2)
Taking the Nvidia SXM2 server with 8 V100 GPU as an example, F= 1251012,B= 12:5109
for inter-node communication (InﬁniBand inter-node connection in the Huawei Cloud cluster we
experiment on) which is the case of PPMoE, and his generally in the range of 103104. Thus, we
roughly have:
t0
a2a=t0
FFN>(E 1)E=16: (3)
Thus, for normally used value of E,e. g. ,64or256,t0
a2at0
FFN4and these two all-to-all
operations would be a critical bottleneck of the DPMoE framework.
In practice, there are other components in the forward process, and the ratio of t0
a2a=t0
FFN will be
largely shrunk. We count the elapsed time of each part in a forward step of a 6.7B-to-143B DPMoE
model and list numbers in Table 1. These two all-to-all operations in MoE layers occupied 65:5%of
total forward time and 79:2%of MoE forward time, making it still a critical bottleneck in training
and inference. Besides, it also results in two other drawbacks: relatively low base-model capacity
(small backbone) and requiring a large cluster to train the model.
Table 1: Components of elapsed time in a forward step. Elapsed time is in ms and the Percentage
represents the proportion to the total forward time.
Total Fwd. MoE Fwd. 1st all-to-all 2nd all-to-all Gating Others
Elapsed time 7617 6294 2566 2423 156 1323
Percentage 100% 82 :6% 33 :7% 31 :8% 2:1% 17:3%
Tensor Parallel Tensor parallel is usually applied when a single device cannot hold the model, or
one data parallel rank and its corresponding on-device experts in MoE model that roughly contains
a backbone and E=D 1experts. Under such circumstances, tensor parallel is able to enlarge the
backbone that can be held on a data parallel rank by almost T, whereTis the world size of tensor
parallel and usually set to be the device count in a single node, with the price of two additional
all-reduce communications of a bshtensor each self-attention and FFN module. Fortunately, these
all-reduce communications are inner-node and the latency is relatively low since high-speed inner-
node interconnection techniques like Nvidia NV-Link are standard conﬁgurations of GPU servers.
Tensor parallel can be applied on all self-attention and FFN modules, or only on non-MoE blocks in
the current PPMoE implementation. Here, we take a tensor-paralleled FFN module as an example
to showcase the components of its forward latency. The forward latency of a tensor-paralleled FFN
module is composed of the computational latency and the all-reduce latency:
tFFN =tcal+tall reduce: (4)
2This equation can be well applied to the backward pass, with the gating and FFN computation time roughly
doubled while communication time unchanged.
3This is the best case that tokens are evenly distributed in all experts. For the worst case that all tokens are
processed on one expert, t0
FFN = 16bsh2=(F).
4Even for the worst case that t0
FFN = 16bsh2=(F),t0
a2ais still multiple times larger than t0
FFN since the
discarded terms in Eq. 2 to Eq. 3 is larger than 1in practice.
6Technical Report
As discussed previously, tcal= 16bsh2=(TF), where T is the tensor parallel world size and is
usually set to be 8, the number of GPUs inside a node. According to the NCCL document, the
latency of an all-reduce operation can be formulated as tall reduce = 2(N 1)(ts+m=B )).
Ignoring the tsterm and ﬁtting to the discussed scenario, we have tall reduce4(T 1)bsh=B .
Thus, we have:
tall reduce=tcal= (T 1)TF=(4Bh): (5)
TakingF= 1251012,B= 300109,T= 8andh= 103into Eq. 5,tall reduce=tcal= 35=6
6. Thus, the communication overhead of tensor parallel with inner-node all-reduce is dramatically
smaller compared to expert parallel with inter-node all-to-all, which is a strong motivation for us to
design the proposed framework.
Pipeline Parallel Pipeline parallel is a powerful scheme to scale models to hundreds or even thou-
sands of billions of parameters when collaborated with tensor parallel, while tensor parallel can only
reach a few billion since inter-node all-reduce of large data is time-consuming. Currently, pipeline
parallel is mostly leveraged in dense model training, e. g., BLOOM Scao et al. (2022), and barely
applied in MoE. The reason is two folds. On one hand, existing DPMoE frameworks usually involve
data parallel, expert parallel, and tensor parallel, composing a complex parallel system that requires
a lot of engineering effort. Combining such a complex scheme with pipeline parallel is an even
further complicated task5. On the other hand, with a large number of experts, the combination of
data parallel, expert parallel, and tensor parallel is already able to scale models to a trillion level.
However, the conﬁguration of a small base model and massive experts may hurt the representative
power of MoE models and some recent work empirically shows that a large backbone with limited
experts performs better Du et al. (2022); Zoph et al. (2022). Recall that the upper bound of tensor
parallel to scale backbone is relatively low due to resource constraints of an individual node, pipeline
parallel becomes a signiﬁcant approach to scale MoE models.
Parallel
Transformer
Layer
InputTransformer Layers  (N/2P)× Parallel 
MHA
LayerNormLayerNormE0Output
GatingNode 0 Devices 0E1
𝒇𝒇𝒈𝒈
Parallel
Transformer
Layer
InputTransformer Layers  (N/2P)× Parallel 
MHA
LayerNormLayerNormE2Output
GatingNode 0 Devices 1E3
𝒇𝒇𝒈𝒈X
XX0
X1Y0
Y1
X2
X3Y2
Y3X0
01234567Gating
X47203647X1
X2
X3Node P Devices 0
Node P Devices 1…
…Parallel Transformer 
Layer with MoE
Parallel Transformer 
Layer with MoE
Figure 4: Illustration of Pipeline MoE.
3.3 P IPELINE MOE
To tackle drawbacks described in subsection 3.2, we propose a novel MoE framework called Pipeline
MoE (PPMoE) to efﬁciently improve the conﬁguration ﬂexibility and largely speed up its training
5There may be two ways to integrate pipeline parallel into existing frameworks: splitting the whole network
(both MoE and non-MoE layers) into stages and splitting only non-MoE layers and distributing experts in the
whole training cluster. The former requires a Plarger cluster to train the model since it replicates existing
systems for Ptimes. The latter brings about additional communication overhead instead of resource burden
because both pipeline parallel and expert parallel requires inter-node communication. Besides, the parallel
scheme is much more complex since all types of parallelisms and communications are coupled and involved.
7Technical Report
and inference process. In this subsection, we will delve into the framework of PPMoE and show
how it works.
3.3.1 O VERVIEW
Pipeline MoE decouples expert parallel from data parallel, in order to conveniently enjoy the ben-
eﬁts of all four parallel strategies (TP, DP, EP and PP) Before entering into the MoE layer, hidden
embeddings are synchronized by the all-reduce communication after the self-attention block so that
each tensor parallel rank receives identical inputs, which is guaranteed by tensor parallel. Hidden
embeddings are then fed to the gating module and generate the dispatching order. Since all inputs,
parameters, and algorithms are exactly the same, the dispatching order on each rank is also identical.
Then token embeddings are dispatched to their corresponding experts according to the dispatching
order by an index selection operation. After processed by related experts, token embeddings are
gathered by an all-reduce communication, ﬁnishing forward computing of this MoE layer. A global
view of Pipeline MoE is illustrated in Fig. 4.
3.3.2 E XPERT PARALLEL
Unlike previous expert parallel of DPMoE built upon data parallel, expert parallel in our scheme
is coupled with tensor parallel. On a tensor parallel group with a world size of T(Tdevices in
this group), Eexperts are evenly distributed on these Tdevices, where there are Nexperts on
each device and NT=E. Note that there are Nexperts on each device and we have to
serialize the computation of each expert on each device. Fortunately, the computational speed of
serially processing a few small tensors is nearly the same as processing a big tensor, according to our
measurement with multiple experiments, indicating that there is little extra latency introduced by the
serial computing of experts6. Such a satisfactory property guarantees a comparable computational
efﬁciency to DPMoE on experts.
3.3.3 G ATING AND DISPATCHING
The gating module of an MoE layer usually consists of a linear mapping, a softmax score function,
and the gating schedule to generate dispatching orders. Our framework is compatible with existing
gating schedules including top-1, top-2, etc.Token embeddings are then dispatched to corresponding
experts with the generated dispatching order. Recall that all token embeddings and dispatching
orders on each tensor parallel rank are identical and that all experts are located in the same tensor-
parallel group, i. e. , the same node, we can easily replace the communication-intensive all-to-
all operation with a simple index selection operation that is well supported in most existing deep
learning platforms like PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019) or MindSpore Huawei Technologies Co. (2022).
We instantiate this process with ﬁg. 4 as an example. Assume that we have 8 token embeddings
(X) as input with a shape of [8;:::], 2 slices in the tensor-parallel group, and 4 experts in the expert
parallel group. The dispatching order is 2;3;1;2;0;3;2;0, which means that the 1st, 4th and 7th
token embedding should be sent to expert 2 ( E2), the 2nd and 6th token embedding should be
processed on expert 3 ( E3), the 3rd on expert 1 ( E1), and the 5th and 8th on expert 0 ( E0). Since
Xis on all ranks of the tensor-parallel group, we can dispatch token embeddings to corresponding
experts byX0=X[[4;7];:::],X1=X[2;:::],X2=X[[0;3;6];:::]andX3=X[[1;5];:::]. After
processed by corresponding experts, output embeddings are ﬁrst gathered inside each tensor parallel
rank by index assignment and then collected by an all-reduce communication across the tensor
parallel group. A PyTorch-like pseudo code is shown in Algorithm 1.
3.3.4 C OMMUNICATION OVERHEAD
In the forward pass, output embeddings with a shape of bshneed to be collected via an all-
reduce communication since the Dropout layer requires full access to its input data inside the data
parallel rank, which is the same as tensor parallel. In the backward pass, the corresponding gradients
should be synchronized before feeding into the LayerNorm layer via another all-reduce communica-
tion. Besides, parameters inside the gating module need to be synchronized in each training step via
6This may be due to well-optimized low-level operators of PyTorch
8Technical Report
Algorithm 1: Forward and Backward Functions in Expert Parallel
def forward(hidden_states):
# All-reduce gradients in the backward pass
hidden_states = copy_to_tensor_parallel_region(hidden_states)
logits = wg(hidden_states)
scores = softmax(logits)
indices, weights, l_aux = gate_function(scores)
sliced_inputs = []
for iin range (num_local_experts):
sliced_inputs.append(hidden_states.index_select(indices[i]))
expert_outputs = []
for i, expert inenumerate(experts):
expert_outputs.append(expert(sliced_inputs[i]))
output_hidden_states = torch.zeros_like(hidden_states)
for iin range (num_local_expert):
output_hidden_states[indices[i], ...] = expert_outputs[i]
# all-reduce output_hidden_states in the forward pass
output_hidden_states = reduce_from_tensor_parallel_region(
output_hidden_states)
return output_hidden_states, l_aux
an all-reduce communication on gradients for each update (each global batch). Luckily, the com-
munication overhead of an MoE layer for data and gradient gathering is exactly the same as tensor
parallel, indicating that no extra communication overhead on data is introduced compared to tensor
parallel. The only overhead is the synchronization of the linear mapping parameters in the gating
module with a shape of hE. Compared to the communication overhead on data i. e.,2bsh
for each global batch, it is negligible since 2bs>>E (45 orders larger). In a word, almost
no extra communication overhead compared to tensor parallel is required.
3.3.5 S CALING WITH PIPELINE PARALLEL
Since all experts and tensor parallel partitions of the same group lie inside an individual node, mod-
els built with our proposed expert parallel scheme can be easily scaled with pipeline parallel like
those dense models do Narayanan et al. (2021). From a layer-wise view, an MoE layer can be easily
replaced by a non-MoE FFN without dramatically changing its input/output format and communi-
cation pattern. In other words, a dense model powered by tensor parallel and pipeline parallel can be
seamlessly transformed into an MoE model by just replacing some of those FFNs with MoE layers
build with our proposed expert parallel. Scaling MoE models with pipeline parallel in the layer axis,
or equally, scaling large dense models with MoE layers in the expert axis can be easily achieved.
Besides, our proposed framework is well decoupled and compatible with data parallel and could be
further efﬁcient by incorporating memory-saving techniques like ZeRO optimizer Rajbhandari et al.
(2020).
3.3.6 R ELATIONSHIP TO PRIOR SCHEMES
DPMoE takes one micro-batch of data as input for each data parallel replica and processes these
data in parallel, which composes of a global batch. On contrary, the Pipeline MoE, integrating the
pipeline parallel inside, takes and processes multiple micro-batches that make up a global batch
sequentially. Note that all parameters keep unchanged during processing one global batch of data
and the gradient of each parameter is summed up across micro-batches for both DPMoE (by gradient
all-reduce) and PPMoE (by gradient accumulation) and then updated. These two approaches could
be regarded as two different patterns to span micro-batches of data in a global batch, DPMoE from
a spatial view, and PPMoE from a temporal view. Thus, Pipeline MoE and previous MoE are
equivalent functionally but different in parallel architectures.
9Technical Report
4 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we show the effectiveness of our proposed Pipeline MoE with extensive experiments.
Since PPMoE is functionally equivalent to DPMoE, we only conduct a convergence veriﬁcation on
training/validation loss and mainly focus on speed and resource analysis.
4.1 E XPERIMENT SETUP AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We mainly take the GPT-3 Medium with 350M parameters (24 layers, 1024 hidden size, 16 atten-
tion heads) and GPT-3 6.7B (32 layers, 4096 hidden size, 32 attention heads) as backbones or base
models and scale them with 64experts on every other FFNs to 6:7B and143B parameters
(referred as small setting and large setting), respectively. In our experiments, we use Dense to rep-
resent backbone models, DPMoE for MoE models with previous parallel architecture, and PPMoE
for MoE models with our proposed parallel architecture. The MoE gating schedule is always set to
top-1, which only activates the top-ranked expert for each token. This setting guarantees that the
MoE model keeps nearly the same computational complexity as its corresponding base model. A
small difference between PPMoE and DPMoE is that the PPMoE abandoned the capacity limit of
each expert7because the max number of tokens for one expert is bswhile it isDbs for DPMoE.
The latter makes it easier to encounter out-of-memory (OOM) errors when almost all tokens lean
to choose the same expert in training. Following Gshard Lepikhin et al. (2020), we also apply an
auxiliary loss term to balance expert assignment.
The micro-batch-size of training each model is set adaptively so that the GPU and/or GPU memory
utilization is above 80%. Following the GPT-3 paper Brown et al. (2020), the sequence length is
always set to be 2;048. For a fair comparison, we use ﬂoat16 (fp16) for all parameters except for
the MoE gating module in ﬂoat32(fp32) . We always adopt an fp16 Adam optimizer that stores
parameters in fp16 and the main copy of parameters, the ﬁrst and second momentums in fp32, so
that the storage for each parameter is 18 bytes. During training, ZeRO optimizer Rajbhandari et al.
(2020) is adopted in all DPMoE models with bound data parallel and expert parallel to further save
memory unless unnecessary, while not in all dense models and all Pipeline MoE models. All models
are trained on our private corpus composed of encyclopedia data, web data, ebook data, etc.
For DPMoE, we perform all the experiments with our implementation based on Megatron-LM8v2.5
and DeepSpeed9v0.5.10. For PPMoE, we build our codebase upon the implementation of Megatron-
LM v2.6. It is notable that although we did not leverage DeepSpeed and ZeRO optimizer when
training PPMoE models since we ignored data parallel, it is feasible to integrate those techniques
into PPMoE to further scale its training with data parallel.
4.2 C ONVERGENCE VERIFICATION
Firstly, we conduct experiments to verify the convergence of Pipeline MoE. We use the 6.7B PPMoE
model that is scaled from a backbone of GPT-3 Medium and trains the model for 40B tokens. Both
models are trained on a cluster of 4 nodes with 32 Nvidia V100 GPUs. Since the longest training
process in our experiment is far from reaching an entire epoch, we just randomly sample a subset
from each component of our corpus to ﬁnish the veriﬁcation. Additionally, a corresponding dense
backbone model with 350M parameters (GPT-3 Medium) is also trained for 40B tokens for compar-
ison. For the PPMoE model, the learning rate is set to be 1:2e 4, while 3e 4for the backbone
model, and ( 1,2) is set to be (0.9, 0.95) for both modes. We plot loss curves of training and
validation in Fig. 5. As demonstrated in Fig 5, the training/validation loss curve of PPMoE is stable
under the Dense counterpart after the initial warmup and shows a satisfactory trend of convergence.
The reason that the loss of the PPMoE model is higher than its backbone at the beginning of training
may lie in that the gating module needs some steps to reach a relatively stable status and so there is
a small period that the training loss of the PPMoE model is higher than the backbone model.
7Although it may slightly increase computation of Pipeline MoE theoretically, we observed that the auxiliary
loss term guarantees a balanced assignment of experts in most of our training.
8https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM
9https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed
10Technical Report
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
number of tokens (B)345678910lm lossTraining Curves
dense train
ppmoe
dense val
ppmoe val
Figure 5: Training and validation loss of 6.7B PPMoE model and its corresponding backbone model
(0.3B dense) for 40B tokens.
Table 2: Comparison on training speed between Dense, DPMoE, and PPMoE models. The through-
put is counted as tokens per second per GPU, and the speed ratio is the ratio between the throughput
of the current model and its corresponding base model.
Model DP TP PP EP ZeRO Training Cluster Throughput Speed Ratio
0.3B Dense 1 8 4 1  32 V100 3244 -
0.3B Dense 4 8 1 1 X 32 V100 4174 -
0.3B Dense 32 1 1 1 X 32 V100 5120 -
6.7B DPMoE 32 1 1 64 X 32 V100 2147 66:2%
6.7B DPMoE 4 8 1 64 X 32 V100 218 6:7%
6.7B PPMoE 1 8 4 64  32 V100 2708 81:4%
6.7B Dense 1 8 16 1  128 V100 356 -
6.7B Dense 16 8 1 1 X 128 V100 597 -
6.7B Dense 128 1 1 1 X 128 V100 410 -
143B DPMoE 256 1 1 64 X 256 V100 93 26:1%
143B DPMoE 128 2 1 64 X 256 V100 183 51:4%
143B DPMoE 32 8 1 64 X 256 V100 63 17:7%
143B PPMoE 1 8 16 64  128 V100 323 90:7%
4.3 T RAINING SPEED ANALYSIS
We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method in terms of
training throughput (number of tokens processed per second per device). For Dense models or
backbone models, we report performance on three settings of parallel schemes: the combination of
tensor parallel and pipeline parallel, the combination of tensor parallel and data parallel, and data
parallel only. For DPMoE models, we test two settings of parallel schemes: the combination of data
parallel and expert parallel, and the combination of data parallel, tensor parallel, and expert parallel.
For PPMoE models, we only test one setting and just ignore data parallel since data parallel only
scales the batch size of training. Most models with data parallel are trained with ZeRO optimizer to
reduce memory overhead. It is notable that the 143B DPMoE model is not able to ﬁt into 16 nodes
11Technical Report
(128 V100 GPUs) without involving tensor parallel, so we increase the cluster to 256 V100 GPUs
to make it possible.
Experimental results are listed in Table 2. For Dense models, pipeline parallel is a critical factor that
largely slows down training, which is the reason that state-of-the-art dense models like BLOOM
omits pipeline parallel when models are not extremely large and can be ﬁt into a single node. For
a fair comparison, we take the slowest ones as baselines to calculate the speed ratio. For DPMoE
models of both the small setting and the large setting, the DP + EP setting achieves higher through-
putS ( 66:2%and26:1%, respectively) than the DP + TP + EP setting with TP = 8 ( 6:7%and17:7%,
respectively). This is because, with a large TP size, the communication overhead is relatively heavy.
The MoE layer in DPMoE introduces two additional all-to-all operations in the forward pass, further
intensifying the communication burden. For the large setting, a better balance with DP + TP + EP
with TP = 2 achieves a higher throughput of 51:4%baseline than the other settings. The reason that
the one with TP is better than the one without TP is that the time complexity of ring-style all-to-all
communication is proportional to the number of processes and a larger world size of expert parallel
brings longer communication time. The above results indicate that it is non-trivial to efﬁciently scale
with DPMoE since there are many factors that can largely inﬂuence the performance.
One can easily discover that PPMoE models consistently achieve high throughput for both small
and large settings. Speciﬁcally, for the small setting, PPMoE obtains a 24:6%improvement over
DPMoE, while for the large setting, the improvement goes further to 76:5%. The consistent im-
provements clearly verify the effectiveness of our proposed Pipeline MoE architecture. We notice
that the improvement in the large setting is much more obvious than it in the small setting. This is
because the relative cost of pipeline parallel is heavier on small models than on large ones, which
also coincides with the phenomenon on Dense models.
Table 3: Components of elapsed time in a forward step of Pipeline MoE. Elapsed times are listed in
the second line and in ms, and the percentage to total forward time is in the third line. Numbers in
blue and cyan indicate that they belong to the same process and numbers in bold is the total elapsed
time for the process.
Total Fwd. MoE Fwd. Gating Exp. Calc. MoE A.-R. FFN Fwd. FFN A.-R.
6257 2393 491 437 1294 1714 1176
100% 38 :2% 7:8% 7:0% 20 :7% 27 :4% 18 :8%
4.4 C OMPONENTS OF ELAPSED TIME FOR PIPELINE MOE
To better depict the resource consumption of the training process, we count components of elapsed
time for a single forward step of a small setting PPMoE model and list elapsed time for dominating
operations in Table 3. Compared to DPMoE which spends 82:6%of forward time in MoE forward,
PPMoE decreases it to 38:2%. In DPMoE, main communication (two all-to-all operators) occupies
65:5%of total forward time and 79:2%of MoE forward time, while PPMoE reduces them to 20:7%
and54:1%. It is notable that the MoE all-reduce time is very close to FFN all-reduce time (only
1:9%of total forward time difference), which coincides with our functional analysis in 3.3.4 and
evidently veriﬁes the effectiveness of eliminating all-to-all communication in MoE.
Delving deeper into the MoE forward time and FFN forward time, we can ﬁnd that the inner-node
all-reduce communication occupied a large proportion of forward time ( 54:0%and68:6%, respec-
tively). Thus, there is more room for further speeding up training if a faster all-reduce scheme is
adopted.
5 C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this work, we introduce PPMoE, a novel MoE framework that efﬁciently solves two critical
drawbacks of DPMoE. By replacing communication-intensive all-to-all dispatching and gathering
of DPMoE with a simple tensor slicing and an inner-node all-reduce, PPMoE largely eases the com-
munication burden of MoE models. By incorporating with pipeline parallel, PPMoE enhances the
scalability of the backbone of MoE models. Experimental results have demonstrated the effective-
ness of the proposed framework.
12Technical Report
Our work paves a new step towards decoupling expert parallel from data parallel and eliminating
the communication-intensive all-to-all operations from expert parallel. We expect that in the future
with more powerful computational resources and parallel computing techniques, MoE models with
reduced communication burden and increased conﬁguration ﬂexibility plays a more signiﬁcant role
in building large language models and their variants for better training/validation efﬁciency and
representative capability.
REFERENCES
Mikel Artetxe, Shruti Bhosale, Naman Goyal, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Xi Victo-
ria Lin, Jingfei Du, Srinivasan Iyer, Ramakanth Pasunuru, et al. Efﬁcient large scale language
modeling with mixtures of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10684 , 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Tianqi Chen, Bing Xu, Chiyuan Zhang, and Carlos Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear
memory cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06174 , 2016.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 , 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim
Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, et al. Glam: Efﬁcient scaling of language
models with mixture-of-experts. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 5547–
5569. PMLR, 2022.
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter
models with simple and efﬁcient sparsity, 2021.
Aaron Harlap, Deepak Narayanan, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri, Nikhil Devanur, Greg
Ganger, and Phil Gibbons. Pipedream: Fast and efﬁcient pipeline parallel dnn training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.03377 , 2018.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701 , 2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556 , 2022.
Ltd. Huawei Technologies Co. Deep learning frameworks. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology , pp.
123–135. Springer, 2022.
Robert A Jacobs, Michael I Jordan, Steven J Nowlan, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of
local experts. Neural computation , 3(1):79–87, 1991.
Can Karakus, Rahul Huilgol, Fei Wu, Anirudh Subramanian, Cade Daniel, Derya Cavdar, Teng Xu,
Haohan Chen, Arash Rahnama, and Luis Quintela. Amazon sagemaker model parallelism: A
general and ﬂexible framework for large model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05972 , 2021.
Young Jin Kim, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Alexandre Muzio, Andres Felipe Cruz Salinas, Liyang Lu,
Amr Hendy, Samyam Rajbhandari, Yuxiong He, and Hany Hassan Awadalla. Scalable and efﬁ-
cient moe training for multitask multilingual models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10465 , 2021.
Vijay Korthikanti, Jared Casper, Sangkug Lym, Lawrence McAfee, Michael Andersch, Mohammad
Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Reducing activation recomputation in large transformer models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05198 , 2022.
13Technical Report
Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang,
Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. Gshard: Scaling giant models with conditional
computation and automatic sharding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16668 , 2020.
Opher Lieber, Or Sharir, Barak Lenz, and Yoav Shoham. Jurassic-1: Technical details and evalua-
tion. White Paper. AI21 Labs , 2021.
Saeed Masoudnia and Reza Ebrahimpour. Mixture of experts: a literature survey. Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Review , 42(2):275–293, 2014.
Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri, Nikhil R Devanur, Gre-
gory R Ganger, Phillip B Gibbons, and Matei Zaharia. Pipedream: generalized pipeline par-
allelism for dnn training. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles , pp. 1–15, 2019.
Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGresley, Mostofa Patwary, Vi-
jay Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catanzaro, et al.
Efﬁcient large-scale language model training on gpu clusters using megatron-lm. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis , pp. 1–15, 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019.
Mary Phuong and Marcus Hutter. Formal algorithms for transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.09238 , 2022.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text
transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Zero: Memory optimizations
toward training trillion parameter models. In SC20: International Conference for High Perfor-
mance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pp. 1–16. IEEE, 2020.
Samyam Rajbhandari, Conglong Li, Zhewei Yao, Minjia Zhang, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Am-
mar Ahmad Awan, Jeff Rasley, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed-moe: Advancing mixture-of-experts
inference and training to power next-generation ai scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05596 , 2022.
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ili ´c, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
Castagn ´e, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Franc ¸ois Yvon, Matthias Gall ´e, et al. Bloom: A 176b-
parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100 , 2022.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton,
and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 , 2017.
Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan
Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model par-
allelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 , 2019.
Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, et al. Using deep-
speed and megatron to train megatron-turing nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11990 , 2022.
14Technical Report
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems , 30, 2017.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068 , 2022.
Barret Zoph, Irwan Bello, Sameer Kumar, Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Jeff Dean, Noam Shazeer, and
William Fedus. Designing effective sparse expert models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08906 ,
2022.
15